**7.10** For a long time, the leading Roman youths remained silent. They felt conflicted, not wanting to shy away from the challenge, but also not wanting to put themselves in such a dangerous position. Then, Titus Manlius, son of Lucius, stepped forward. He was the same man who had saved his father from the relentless harassment of the tribune.

He approached the dictator and said, "General, without your orders, I would never fight out of turn, not even if I saw victory ahead. If you allow me, I want to prove to that beast, who is arrogantly dancing in front of the enemy's standards, that I come from the family that hurled a column of Gauls from the Tarpeian Rock."

Dictator Poenus responded, "Titus Manlius, may you be successful in your bravery and your loyalty to your father and your country. Go ahead, and with the help of the gods, uphold the invincibility of the Roman name."

His friends then armed the young man. He took an infantryman's shield and strapped on a short Spanish sword, suitable for close fighting. Once he was armed and ready, they led him out to face the armed and adorned Gaul, who was displaying a foolish sense of triumph and, as the ancients thought noteworthy to mention, sticking out his tongue in mockery. The others then returned to their positions, leaving the two armed men in the middle, more like gladiators than soldiers.

They weren't evenly matched, at least not to those who were judging by appearances. The Gaul was enormous, his body resplendent in multicolored clothing with painted armor and shining gold-inlaid weapons. The Roman, on the other hand, was of average military height, like most soldiers, and his demeanor was unassuming. His weapons were practical, not flashy. There was no singing, strutting, or waving around his weapons from the Roman, only a heart of silent rage and resolve; he had saved his ferocity for the fight.

When they stood between the two armies, with so many thousands of onlookers watching them with mix of anxious hope and fear, the Gaul, looming like a mountain, swung his shield forward with his left hand and vainly slashed his sword against the Roman's armor with a tremendous crash, but it had no effect. The Roman, lifting his sword, hit the lower edge of the Gaul's shield with his own shield, pushing it out of the way. He moved in close, so that none of his body was exposed, and wedged himself between the Gaul's arms and his body. With one thrust after another, he stabbed the Gaul's stomach and groin. The Gaul fell headfirst to the ground, stretching out over a great space. He left the body of the fallen Gaul untouched other than to take the torc \[neck collar\]. Though it was covered in blood, Titus Manlius put the torc around his own neck.

The Gauls were frozen, both in fear and in admiration. The Romans, eager to meet their soldier from their post, ran forward to greet their champion, praising him and congratulating him as they led him back to the Dictator. Amid rough soldierly chants, he was given the name Torquatus. This name was passed down and celebrated as an honor to his family. The Dictator gave him a golden chaplet as a gift and, in front of a public assembly, loudly praised his actions.