**7.12** The following year, Marcus Popilius Laenas and Gnaeus Manlius Capitolinus Imperiosus were consuls. An army from the city of Tibur quietly traveled to Rome during the night. The suddenness of their arrival and the confusion of the night caused fear among the Romans, who were abruptly awakened from sleep. Many didn't know who the enemy was or where they had come from. However, a cry was quickly given to arms, and the Romans quickly armed themselves, posted guards at the gates, and secured the walls with troops.

When daylight revealed a moderate force outside the walls and it was clear that the enemy was Tiburtine, the consuls exited out two gates, attacking the lines that were already approaching the walls. It was clear that the Tiburtines had relied more on the element of surprise than their bravery, as they barely withstood the first Roman charge. In fact, their arrival seemed to benefit the Romans because the shared fear of war quelled an emerging flareup between the patricians and plebeians.

Another enemy invasion caused more fear in the countryside than in the City. Soldiers from Tarquinii ravaged the Roman territory, particularly where they bordered the Etruscan territory. When they refused to make restitution, the new consuls, Gnaeus Fabius Ambustus and Gaius Plautius Proculus, declared war on them by order of the people. Consul Fabius was assigned to this province, and Consul Plautius was assigned the Hernicians.

There were also rumors of a Gallic war. However, the Romans found some comfort in a peace treaty with the Latins. The Latins also provided a significant number of soldiers in accordance with an old treaty which had not been observed for many years. With this support, the Romans were less concerned about the news confirming that the Gauls had reached Praeneste and were camped near Pedum. It was decided that Gaius Sulpicius should be appointed Dictator. Consul Gaius Plautius nominated him, and Marcus Valerius was assigned as his Master of the Horse. They selected the best soldiers from the two consular armies to fight the Gauls.

This war was longer and less satisfying than either side would have liked. Initially, only the Gauls wanted to fight, but the Roman soldiers soon surpassed them in their eagerness to fight. The Dictator, however, was in no rush to risk battling an enemy who would naturally weaken over time due to their location, the weather, the lack of good defenses, and lack of food. He also knew that the Gauls' strength lay in quick action, which would diminish with time. 

Knowing the situation at hand, he thus decided to drag out the war and he threatened severe punishment to anyone who fought without orders. The soldiers were reluctant to accept this. At first, they began to talk about the Dictator in their talks at the posts and watches, sometimes voicing their anger at the Senate for not allowing the war to be led by the consuls. They complained that an excellent commander had been chosen, but that he believed victory would fall from the sky into his lap without him doing anything.

The men continued openly expressing their dissatisfaction during the day. As the debate became more heated, they threatened to fight without orders or to march back to Rome all together. The centurions also began to mingle with the soldiers, and their complaints were heard not only in their own quarters but also in the main camps and at the general's tent. The crowd grew to the size of an assembly, shouting that they should go immediately to the Dictator and that Sextus Tullius should speak on behalf of the army, being a man of virtue and courage.