**7.13** Sextus Tullius, now serving for the seventh time as senior centurion of a legion \[primus pilus\] was the most highly distinguished among the infantry for his service. He led a group of soldiers to the tribunal and addressed Dictator Sulpicius, who was surprised not only at the crowd but at Tullius, who was the most obedient to the Dictator's commands.

Tullius spoke: "If it be permitted, Dictator, the entire army feels that you have accused them of cowardice and stripped them of their arms as a form of humiliation without being allowed to fight. They have asked me to represent them before you."

"If we had abandoned our post, retreated from the enemy, or lost our standards in a shameful manner, I would still argue that we deserve the chance to make amends through bravery and to erase the memory of our disgrace with newfound glory. Even the legions defeated at Allia managed to reclaim the same land they lost in a panic by demonstrating their courage when they left Veii. By the kindness of the gods, your good fortune, and that of the Roman people, our cause and our glory remain intact."

"However, I hesitate to mention glory, as the enemy mocks us as if we're women hiding behind a rampart. But what hurts us more is that, you, our general, seem to view your army as spiritless, unarmed, and incompetent. Without testing us, you have given up on us, treating us as if we're crippled and incapacitated. We can only assume that this is why you, a seasoned and brave general, appear to be idle. Regardless, it's better for you to question our courage than for us to question yours. If this strategy isn't your own but if it's a policy of the state or a plot by the patricians which is keeping us exiled from the City and our homes, I ask you to consider my words as coming not from soldiers to their general, but by the plebeians to the patricians. Just as patricians will tell you that they have their own plans, so too do we have ours. Who can blame us? We consider ourselves soldiers, not slaves, and we see ourselves as men sent to war, not into exile. We're ready to fight like true Romans if given the signal and led into battle."

"If there is no need for arms, we would rather spend our idle time in Rome than in a camp. Let these things be told to the senators. As your soldiers, we beg you, general, to give us a chance to fight. We want to win, and we want to win with you as our leader. We want to win the distinguished laurel for you, to enter the City in Triumph with you, following your chariot, and to approach the Temple of Jupiter Optimus Maximus while celebrating your victory." 

The crowd echoed Tullius's plea, urging Dictator Sulpicius to give the signal and order them to take up arms.