**7.9** The next year, Gaius Sulpicius Peticus and Gaius Licinius Calvus were named consuls and led an army against the Hernicians. They found no enemy in the country and took their city of Ferentinum by force. On their return, the city of Tibur closed their gates to them. There had been many complaints on both sides before this, but this was the final straw that led to war being declared against the Tiburtines after several incidents required restitution demanded through fetials. 

It's well known that Titus Quinctius Poenus was the Dictator that year, and Servius Cornelius Maluginensis was his Master of the Horse. Licinius Macer writes that Consul Gaius Licinius named him as Dictator in order to hold the elections. This was done to block Consul Licinius' own colleague, Consul Sulpicius, from prioritizing his own election over the war. Consul Sulpicius was eager to get re-elected and continue his consulship. This ambition needed to be checked. However, the praises he showers upon his own family makes Licinius' authority less credible. As I find no mention of this in the older annals, I'm inclined to believe that the Dictator was appointed because of a war with the Gauls.

It's certain in that year, the Gauls set up their camp at the third milestone on the Salarian road, on the far side of the bridge over the Anio River. Dictator Poenus, after declaring a halt to civil business due to the Gauls' unrest, made all the younger men of draft age swear a military oath. He then left the City with a large army and set up his camp on the near bank of the Anio River. The bridge was between the two armies, and neither side tried to destroy it, as it would show fear. There were frequent fights for control of the bridge, but it was unclear who was in control, as the advantage was so uncertain. Then a Gaul of extraordinary size stepped onto the empty bridge and shouted as loudly as he could, "Let the bravest man that Rome has come forward to fight, so that a battle between us can show which nation is better at war."