**2.45** At this point, the Roman consuls were afraid of nothing but their own forces and their own weapons. They remembered the disastrous results of the last war and didn't want to risk facing two armies at once. So, they kept everyone in camp, trying to avoid a double danger, hoping that time would allow the soldiers to simmer and come to their senses.

Aware of this, the Veientes and other Etruscans were aggressive in trying to get them to act. They taunted the Romans first by riding up to the camp and challenging them to fight. When this didn't receive any response, they resorted to yelling insults saying that the consuls were using the internal conflict as an easy excuse for being cowards. They accused the consuls of distrusting their troops rather than believing their troops would fight to win. This was a new kind of mutiny, that fully armed men would be both silent and idle. There were also insults hurled about the Romans' heritage, mixing truth with lies. They shouted all these things close to the ramparts and gates of the camp so that everyone would hear. However, despite the insults, the consuls remained patient.

The soldiers were affected by it, however, torn between anger and shame. They were distracted from their internal issues and wanted to punish the enemy. But they also didn't want the consuls or the patricians to claim the victory. They were torn between their hatred for the enemy and their resentment towards their leaders.

Eventually, their anger toward the enemy won out, so proudly and insolently did the enemy mock them. They gathered at the consuls' tent, demanding to fight and requesting that the signal should be given. The consuls pretended to consider their request, taking time to talk among themselves. They wanted to fight. However, they decided to suppress this desire and continue to delay, hoping to sharpen the soldiers' eagerness to win. A response was given that it was too soon, it wasn't yet time to fight and all soldiers must stay in camp. Anyone who fought without orders would be executed as an enemy. Now dismissed, the soldiers were convinced that the consuls were refusing to fight. This only made the soldiers even more eager for battle.

The enemy became more aggressive when they heard that the consuls had decided not to fight, knowing that they could now insult the Romans without consequences. They yelled that the Romans didn't trust their own troops; the army was close to mutiny; and the end of the Roman empire has come. Relying on these insults and many more, they arrived at the gates, stopping short of storming the Roman camp.

The Roman soldiers could not tolerate this any longer. The entire camp rushed from all sides to the praetorium. This time they didn't make their demands gradually, as before, through the leaders of the centurions. Instead, they shouted together from everywhere. The time was right; yet why were the consuls hesitating?

Fabius, realizing his colleague was beginning to concede for fear of a riot, commanded silence with a trumpet blast, and said: "I know that these men, Gnaeus Manlius, can be victorious. Whether they want to, they must show us. Therefore, it is decreed that no signal will be given unless they swear to the gods to return victorious from this battle. Once, in a battle, the soldiers betrayed a Roman consul; but they'll never betray the gods."

A centurion named Marcus Flavoleius, was one of the leaders urging them on to fight. He said, "I'll return victorious from the field, Marcus Fabius," invoking the wrath of Jupiter, Mars Gradivus, and the other angry gods if he should fail to keep his vow. Likewise, the entire army followed, each individually swearing the same oath. Once all had sworn, the signal was given; they seized their weapons and went into battle full of anger and hope. They invited the Etruscans to continue hurling their insults. Now armed, each Roman wanted an enemy who was as ready with his sword as he was with his tongue.

On that day, both among the plebeians and the patricians, there was exceptional valor; the name of the Fabii stood out the most. The leaders decided that this battle, and their heroism in it, had healed the bitter hostility of the plebeians toward their class.