**2.46** Battle lines were formed. Neither the Veientes nor the Etruscans held back; they strongly hoped that the Romans wouldn't fight with them, just as the Romans hadn't fought with the Aequians. In fact, given everyone's heightened emotions and the criticalness of the situation, the Romans might even perform worse than before.

However, the outcome was completely different. The Roman soldiers fought with more ferocity now than they had ever before, in any other war. This was due to the enemy's insults outside their camp, and the consuls delaying the war. The Etruscans barely had time to organize their ranks as Roman spears were hastily thrown, without aim. They then quickly closed in for the fiercest type of fighting: man-to-man, swords in hand, where Mars, the god of war, is most savage.

The Fabian family stood out among the rest, setting an example for their fellow citizens. One of them, Quintus Fabius, who had been consul three years before, was leading an attack on a tightly packed group of Veientes. As he moved incautiously among the enemy, he was caught off-guard by an Etruscan warrior, fierce in strength and skilled in arms, who stabbed him in the chest with his sword. When the sword was pulled out, Fabius fell violently forward onto his wound. One man may have fallen, but both armies felt the impact of his fall, and the Romans began to retreat.

Then Consul Marcus Fabius jumped over the fallen body and placed his shield over it, challenging his soldiers:

"Was this what you swore, soldiers, that you would run away and return to your camp? Do you fear these cowardly enemies more than Jupiter and Mars, by whom you swore? But I, though I have sworn no oath, will either return victorious or I will die fighting here by you, Quintus Fabius!"

Caeso Fabius, the consul of the previous year, told his brother, "Do you think any of your words will persuade them to fight, brother? They have sworn to the gods. Let the gods persuade them. And let's, as men of noble birth who are worthy of the Fabius name, inspire the courage of our soldiers by fighting rather than by preaching!" The two Fabii then charged to the front with their spears, leading the entire line with them.