**2.47** While the battle resumed on one side, Consul Gnaeus Manlius jumped into the fight on the other side with equal energy. A similar outcome occurred here; just as the soldiers bravely followed Consul Fabius on one wing, they also followed Consul Manlius on this wing with just as much valor, pushing back the enemy to the point of defeat. However, when Manlius was seriously injured and had to withdraw from the battle, the soldiers started to retreat, thinking he had been killed.

And they would have given the ground up entirely had not Consul Fabius, seeing the men retreating, quickly rode over with several squadrons of cavalry, shouting that Manlius was still alive and that he was here to help, having just won a victory by defeating the other wing. This stopped the retreat. Manlius then reappeared to help restore the battle line. The familiar voices of the two consuls reignited the soldiers' courage.

At the same time, the enemy's line was now weakened because they detached their reserves, confident in their larger numbers, and sent them to attack the Romans' camp. This attack at the camp was met with little resistance and so the enemy frittered away their time, their thoughts focused more on looting than fighting. However, the Roman triarii \[veteran soldiers\] who had been guarding the camp but hadn't been able to withstand the enemy's first incursion, sent messengers to the consuls telling them the current situation. The triarii then joined together and went to defend the consuls' headquarters, the praetorium, on their own initiative without waiting for orders.

Consul Manlius returned to the camp at once and stationed soldiers at all the gates, effectively blocking all possible escape routes. The enraged Etruscans, in despair, fought wildly rather than bravely. They charged repeatedly wherever hope showed them an exit, all in vain. Finally a group of young Etruscan soldiers attacked Consul Manlius, easily identifiable by his armor. The first attacks were blocked by those surrounding him, but, eventually, they could not hold off the onslaught. Manlius was fatally wounded and fell, and all around him were killed.

The Etruscans then became even more reckless, sending fear through the Romans who were driven through the camp in a panic. The situation would have become dire if not for the legates, or lieutenant generals, who quickly grabbed Consul Manlius' body and opened a gate for the enemy to escape. The enemy rushed out of the gate in a chaotic column, and immediately ran into the other victorious Consul, Marcus Fabius and his soldiers, where the Etruscans were once again cut to pieces or fled in different directions.

This was a significant victory, but it was marred by the deaths of two distinguished men, Quintus Fabius and Consul Manlius. Consul Fabius, despite being offered a Triumph by the Senate, declined. He said that if the army could Triumph without their general, he would readily agree to a Triumph in recognition of their exceptional performance in the war. However, with his family mourning the death of his brother Quintus Fabius, and the City grieving the loss of one of its consuls, he wouldn't accept the laurel tarnished by public and private sorrow.

The Triumph he declined was more notable than any Triumph he could have accepted, proving that sometimes, refusing glory at the right time can make it shine even brighter. He then held two funerals in succession, one for his colleague and one for his brother, delivering the eulogies for both, and by praising them, he himself received the most praise.

Remembering his initial goal as Consul, to regain the people's affection, he assigned the injured soldiers to the patricians for treatment. Most of them were given to the Fabii, who took better care of them than anyone else. From then on, the Fabii became popular, not through any schemes, but through their beneficial actions for the state.