**10.2** During this year, a Greek fleet led by Cleonymus of Lacedaemon \[Sparta, or Laconia\], arrived on the coast of Italy and captured Thuria, a city in the Sallentini territory. Consul Aemilius was sent to fight this enemy.

In a single engagement, he routed the enemy completely, forcing them to retreat to their ships. Thuria was then returned to its original inhabitants, and peace was restored in the Sallentini region. I find in some historical records that suggest that Junius Bubulcus was sent as Dictator against the Sallentini, and that Cleonymus left Italy without engaging in battle with the Romans.

Cleonymus then sailed around the Brundisium promontory and, driven by the winds into middle of the Gulf of the Adriatic Sea, he found the left shore had a lack of harbors while the right shore was inhabited by Illyrians, Liburnians, and Histrians. These tribes were savage, infamous at sea for their piracy, and they terrified him. He continued to the top of the gulf to the shores of the Veneti.

Here, he sent a small group to scout the land. They reported back about a narrow strip of beach, behind which were marshes flooded by tides of the sea. They could see nearby fields, and they could see hills in the distance. There was an opening to a very deep river, the Meduacus, which could allow some ships to sail upriver and could possibly provide a safe harbor. Cleonymus ordered his fleet to sail up this river against the current.

The larger ships couldn't navigate the narrow channel, so the armed troops transferred to smaller vessels, leaving a light guard in the ships. They arrived at the cultivated fields occupied by the tribes of the Patavini who lived in three villages along the riverbank. Then, they attacked these villages, set fire to the houses, and took many people and livestock as spoils. With the sweetness of their plunder, they proceeded further inland, straying even farther from the ships.

The news of this attack reached Patavium, where the residents were always ready for battle due to the Gallic presence nearby. They divided their young men into two groups. One group was sent to the region where the scattered marauders who were pillaging were reported. The other group, to prevent the marauders from returning to their ships, took a different route to the fleet at anchor which was fourteen miles away from the town.

The latter group attacked the small ships, killing the guards, and forced the terrified sailors to move their ships to the other side of the river. 

The other group's attack on the scattered marauders was also successful. The Greeks, trying to return to their ships, were blocked by the Veneti. Thus, they were surrounded in the middle and killed; some Greeks who were captured revealed that their leader, Cleonymus, and his fleet were only three miles away.

The captives were sent to the nearest village under guard. Some soldiers boarded the flat-bottomed vessels, which were designed to navigate the shallow waters easily, while others, armed, boarded the ships they had recently captured from the enemy.

They sailed down the river and surrounded the large, cumbersome immobile Greek ships, which were more afraid of the unknown sands and flats than the Romans. The Greeks fled toward the open sea and the Veneti pursued them more fiercely than the Greeks fought back. They followed them as far as the river's mouth, then captured and burned part of the fleet that had run aground in the chaos. Back to Patavium they returned, victorious.

Cleonymus, having failed in all regions of the Adriatic Sea, left with barely a fifth of his navy unscathed. Many people alive today have seen the prows of the Spartan ships and the spoils of the Laconians hanging in the old Temple of Juno at Patavium.  Every year, to commemorate the naval victory, a solemn contest of ships is carried out in the middle of the river that flows through the town.