**10.4** The news of this defeat caused a greater fear in Rome than the situation warranted. It was as if the entire army had been wiped out. A state of emergency was declared, all legal business was suspended, guards were stationed at the city gates, and there were nightly vigils on every street. Armor, weapons and ammunition were gathered and piled up on the city walls. All young citizens were forced to enlist, and Dictator Valerius was sent back to the army. 

Upon his arrival, the Dictator found the situation more stable than he had anticipated, thanks to the efforts of the Master of the Horse. The camp had been moved to a safer location. He found the cohorts that had lost their standards were left outside the ramparts without tents, as punishment. The troops were eager for battle, driven by the desire to erase their previous humiliation as soon as possible.

He immediately moved his camp into the territory of Rusellae. The enemy also followed him there, and although the enemy had great confidence in their strength as shown by their recent victory in open combat, they tried to trick the Romans with a strategy that had worked before. 

Near the Roman camp stood the half-ruined roofs of houses in a village that had been burned during the devastation of the surrounding fields. The enemy hid a group of soldiers there and drove some cattle within sight of a Roman garrison, led by Legate Gnaeus Fulvius.

When none of the Romans were lured by this bait to leave their posts, one of the "shepherds" approached close to the Roman fortifications and shouted to the others, who were hesitantly driving their cattle away from the ruins of the village, why they delayed when they could safely drive the cattle right through the middle of the Roman camp.

This was translated to the Legate by some Caeretan interpreters and indignation spread through all the ranks of soldiers. They were eager to act but didn't dare to move without orders. Fulvius ordered some who were familiar with the language to carefully observe whether the shepherd's dialect resembled that of country folk or city dwellers.

When they reported that the sound of the herdsmen's speech, his appearance, and his neatness were more refined than typical shepherds, Fulvius said, "Go, then, and tell them to abandon their useless ambushes. The Romans know everything and can no more be caught by deception than they can be defeated in battle.” 

Upon receiving this message, the enemy soldiers lying in ambush emerged from their hiding places and marched into the open plain, where they were visible on all sides with their standards displayed. The Legate realized that his small force was no match for the enemy's strength. He quickly sent a message to Dictator Valerius asking for reinforcements; meanwhile, he held off the enemy's attack.