**10.5** Upon receiving the message, the Dictator commanded the standards to advance and the soldiers to follow, armed. But everything was done almost faster than he commanded; the standards and weapons were hurriedly taken up, and the soldiers had to be restrained from rushing forward at full speed. They burned to avenge their indignation, and the shouts from the ongoing battle of Legate Fulvius made them even more excited. They emboldened each other, and urged the standard-bearers to speed up. The more the Dictator saw them hurrying, the more he tried to restrain the column and ordered them to advance slowly.

Meanwhile, the Etruscans, excited at the beginning of the battle, arrived with their full force. Multiple messengers from Fulvius reported to the Dictator that all Etruscan legions had joined the battle, and his men could no longer hold them off. From his vantage point, the Dictator could see the precarious situation the garrison was in. However, he was confident that the Legate could still hold his ground and knew that he, himself, was ready to step in if necessary. He would let the enemy tire themselves out so that he could attack them with his fresh troops when they were exhausted.

Although the Romans advanced slowly, they were now at the right distance for the cavalry to charge. The first standards of the legions marched in front to avoid arousing suspicion of any covert or unexpected movements. With this, gaps were left in the infantry ranks wide enough to allow the horses to gallop through. Simultaneously, the entire Roman line shouted and the cavalry launched at full speed, overwhelming the enemy and causing widespread panic. After this, the surrounded party, who had received help just in time, were allowed to rest and the fresh troops took over the fight.

The battle was neither long nor uncertain. The defeated enemy fled to their camp, yielding to the advancing Roman standards and retreating to the farthest part of the camp. Their escape was hindered by the narrow passages of the gates, and many climbed onto the rampart and the wall, hoping to defend themselves from a higher place or climb over to escape. By chance, a section of the rampart was badly compacted by the weight of the multitude and collapsed, falling into the trench. Believing that the gods had provided them a way out, they escaped, leaving most of their weapons behind. 

This battle effectively crushed the Etruscans' power for the second time. They agreed to provide a year's pay and two months' supply of grain. With the Dictator's permission, they sent ambassadors to Rome to negotiate peace. Their request was denied, but a two-year truce was granted. Dictator Valerius returned to the city in Triumph. 

Some authorities believe that the Dictator restored peace in Etruscan territory without a significant battle, simply by resolving the disputes of the Arretians and reconciling the Cilnii family with the plebeians. Marcus Valerius was elected consul after his dictatorship ended. Many believe this happened without his request and while he was away, with the election held by an interrex. Everyone agrees that he served as consul alongside Quintus Appuleius Pansa.