**5.32** On the first day of July, the following individuals assumed their offices: Lucius Lucretius, Servius Sulpicius, Marcus Aemilius, Lucius Furius Medullinus for the seventh time, Agrippa Furius, and Gaius Aemilius for the second time. Lucius Lucretius and Gaius Aemilius were assigned the Volsinii as their province, while Agrippa Furius and Servius Sulpicius were given the Sappinati.

The first battle was with the Volsinii. Despite the size of the enemy forces, the battle was not particularly intense in the fighting. Their battle line was routed at the first engagement. Eight thousand soldiers, having turned to flight, were intercepted by the Roman cavalry. They laid down their arms and surrendered.

The fame of this victory deterred the Sappinati from engaging in battle. Instead, they fortified the walls of their towns. The Romans, unopposed, plundered both Sappinati and Volsinii territories. This continued until a twenty-year truce was granted to the war-weary Volsinii, on the condition that they return the goods of the Roman people and cover the army's pay for that year.

In the same year, a plebeian named Marcus Caedicius reported to the tribunes that while on the Via Nova, where there is now a chapel above the Temple of Vesta, he had heard a voice, louder than any human's voice, during the silence of the night. The voice, he claimed, warned of the approaching Gauls and for him to warn the magistrates. This warning was ignored, largely due to Caedicius' low social status and that the Gauls lived a very long distance away from Rome.

In addition to ignoring divine warnings, the Romans also alienated Marcus Furius Camillus, the only remaining human that could save the City. He had recently lost his young son. Still, he was indicted by Lucius Apuleius, a plebeian tribune, and was facing a trial over the matter of the handling of spoils from Veii. When Camillus asked his fellow tribesmen and clients, who were a large part of the plebeians, for support, they offered to pay any fine he might incur but admitted they couldn't acquit him. Feeling wronged, Camillus went into exile and prayed that the gods would soon give his ungrateful City a reason to miss him. In his absence, he was fined fifteen-thousand pounds aes rude in weight.