**10.39** The consuls departed from Rome. The first to go was Spurius Carvilius. He was given command of the veteran legions who had been left in the territory of Interamna by Marcus Atilius, the previous year's consul. Carvilius led them into Samnium territory, where he stormed and captured the town of Amiternum while the enemy was occupied with their religious rituals and secret meetings. He killed about two thousand eight hundred men and took four thousand two hundred and seventy prisoners. The next was Papirius, with a new army raised by a decree of the Senate, who stormed the city of Duronia. He captured fewer prisoners than Carvilius but killed considerably more people. Both places yielded rich spoils.

From there, the consuls wandered through the Samnium territory causing severe damage particularly in the area of Atina. Carvilius reached Cominium and Papirius arrived at Aquilonia, where the main Samnite forces were stationed.

There, for a while, they neither stayed idle nor fought vigorously. Instead, the days were spent provoking the enemy when they were quiet, retreating when they resisted, and threatening battle more but not actually waging it. Whatever was begun and then abandoned, every result, even of the smallest matters, was reported immediately to the other Roman camp, twenty miles away, as both consuls cooperated in the conduct of all matters.

Carvilius was focused more on Aquilonia, where the situation was more critical, than on Cominium, which he was actually besieging. 

When Consul Papirius was sufficiently prepared for battle, he sent a messenger to Carvilius that he planned to fight Aquilonia the next day, pending positive auspices. If Carvilius could attack Cominium with the greatest force possible at the same time as his attack on Aquilonia, the Samnites would have no opportunity to send reinforcements to help Aquilonia. The messenger spent the day traveling and returned that night reporting that Carvilius approved of the plan.

Immediately upon sending the messenger, Papirius held a meeting of his troops. He discussed many things concerning the entire conduct of the war and many things about the enemy's current display of arms and armor. He emphasized that their fancy gear was more for show than for actual combat. Plumes (on the helmets) didn't inflict wounds. Roman javelins could pierce any shield, no matter how painted and gilded, and their white tunics would soon be stained with blood from their swords. 

He recalled how his father had defeated a Samnite army adorned in gold and silver. The spoils from that battle had been more valuable to Rome than they had been to the Samnites themselves as armor. He suggested that it might be his family's destiny to fight against the Samnites' strongest forces and bring back spoils that were sufficiently splendid for decorating public places in the City. 

The gods were on his side, he believed, because of the treaties the Samnites had repeatedly asked for and then broken. Gods were likely more hostile to an army that had violated their oaths and performed abhorrent sacrifices involving sacrificial bloodshed, mixing the blood of slaughtered men and beasts. The Samnites were under a two-fold curse from heaven; first, filled with dread at the thought of the gods witnessing the treaties made with Rome, and second, horror-struck at the blasphemous oaths which were uttered to break those treaties, an oath which the soldiers were forced to take and which they recall with loathing. He ended by saying that the Samnites were afraid of their gods, their fellow countrymen, and the Romans all at the same time.