**10.35** The other consul, Marcus Atilius, didn't find the war as easy.

As he was leading his legions toward Luceria, having heard that the Samnites were laying siege, he encountered the enemy at the border of Lucerian territory. On this occasion, the enemy's anger made their strength equal to the Romans.

The battle was one of shifting fortunes and doubtful issue. However, the outcome was worse for the Romans. They weren't used to defeat and, as they retreated, they could see how many more wounds and slaughter had happened on their side. Fear spread throughout the Roman camp. If this fear had taken hold during the battle, they would have surely been defeated. As it was, they spent an anxious night, expecting an attack on their camp by the Samnites or a forced battle at dawn.

The Samnites had suffered fewer losses than the Romans, but their morale was just as low. At daybreak, they wanted to retreat without further fighting. However, there was only one road, and it passed close to the Roman camp. When they entered this road, it looked as if they were marching straight to attack the Roman camp.

Consul Atilius ordered his men to arm themselves and follow him out of the camp. He gave orders to the legates, tribunes, and the prefects of the allies on how he wanted them to act. They all assured him that they would do their best but told him that the soldiers were disheartened. They had spent a sleepless night due to their wounds and the groans of their dying comrades. If the enemy approached the camp before dawn, they warned, panic would be so great that many would desert their standards. They were only held back from fleeing by their shame. Yet, they already saw themselves as defeated.

Hearing this, the consul felt it necessary to speak to the soldiers himself. Wherever he went, he scolded those who were hesitating to arm themselves. What was their reluctance to fight? Why were they hesitating? He warned them that if they didn't leave the camp, the enemy would enter it. They would be fighting to defend their tents if they did not fight to defend their rampart. Armed men who fight their enemy always have a chance of victory, but an unarmed man who waits for his enemy can only expect death or slavery.

In response to his reprimands, the soldiers said they were too tired from the previous day's battle. They had no strength or blood left, and the enemy seemed more numerous than the day before. 

Meanwhile, in the middle of this, the enemy column was approaching. As they came closer, the soldiers saw that the Samnites were carrying palisades for a rampart and there was no doubt that they clearly intended to surround the Roman camp.

At this, the Consul lost his patience, shouting that it was an outrageous deed that such an insult and disgrace should be endured from the most cowardly enemy:

"Should we then sit in camp so that we die of hunger in disgrace rather than, if need be, by the sword with honor? May the gods bring a better fate. Let each man do what he considers worthy of himself. I, Consul Marcus Atilius, will face the enemy alone, if no one else should follow, and would rather die falling among the Samnite standards than see the Roman camp surrounded."

This statement of the Consul was approved by the legates, the tribunes, all of the cavalry companies, and the centurions of the first rank. Eventually, the soldiers, shamed into action, reluctantly took up their arms and sluggishly marched out of the camp in a long and broken column. They moved toward the enemy gloomy and almost as if defeated, with no more confidence in hope or spirit.

And so, as soon as the Roman standards were seen, a shout was carried from the first Samnite column to the last. The Romans were coming out, as they had feared, to block their retreat. They realized that there was no way to escape from there. They had two choices: either to fall in battle right there or to cut down the enemy and escape over their corpses.