**10.34** Postumius tried to take control of Milionia, a Samnite city, initially through a direct attack. When that failed, he approached the city walls by regular means, using siege works and vineae which could be pressed against the walls. Thus, the Romans were able to enter the city using ladders.

The battle raged throughout the city from the fourth hour until nearly the eighth hour with the outcome uncertain for a long time. Eventually, the Romans took over the town. They killed three thousand two hundred Samnites and captured four thousand seven hundred, in addition to other spoils of war.

From there the legions were led to Feritrum. The inhabitants had quietly left during the night, taking all their belongings that could be carried or driven through the opposite gate.

Upon arrival, the consul approached the city walls in such a manner as to prepare for battle and set up just as if they would face the same resistance as they did in Milionia. Noticing the eerie silence and absence of armed men on the towers and walls, he held back the soldiers eager from climbing the deserted fortifications, fearing a trap.

He instructed two divisions of the allied Latin cavalry to circle the city walls and investigate. The cavalry, opening one gate and another in the same region, found tracks of the evening's flight of the enemy on their way out. They then rode slowly through the unguarded gates and saw the city entirely accessible by straight roads. Reporting back to the consul, they confirmed that the city had been abandoned, as evidenced by the emptiness, the recent tracks of hasty flight, as well as the scattered belongings abandoned in the terror of the night.

Upon hearing this, Consul Postumius led the army around to the side of the city where the cavalry had approached. Stopping not far from the gate, he ordered five horsemen to enter the city, and having advanced a little distance, three will remain in place, and if they appear safe, the other two scouts will return to him after exploring. When the scouts returned, they reported that they had advanced to a vantage point inside and had seen far and wide only silence and desolation. Immediately the consul led some light-armed cohorts into the city while ordering the rest of the troops to set up a camp.

When the soldiers entered the city by breaking the doors, they found only a few men, either old or sick, and some things left behind that had been too difficult to move. These were taken as loot. The prisoners revealed that several cities in the area had made a common plan to evacuate. Their own people had left at the first watch, and they believed the other cities would be similarly deserted.

The prisoners' information proved accurate, and Consul Postumius took over the abandoned towns.