**10.37** The other consul, Postumius, no longer had military duties in Samnium. He moved his forces to the Etruscan territory and first devastated the lands of the Volsinians. When they came out to defend, he won a decisive victory over them not far from their own walls. Two thousand eight hundred Etruscans were killed; the rest were saved by the closeness of their city.

The army then moved to the territory of Rusella, where they not only ravaged the lands but also captured the town. More than two thousand men were taken prisoner, and less than two thousand were killed around the walls. 

A peace agreement made that year in the Etruscan territory, and it was more glorious and honorable than the war. Three of the most powerful Etruscan cities, Volsinii, Perusia, and Arretium of the Volsinians, sued for peace. They made a pact with the consul to provide clothing and grain for his army, in exchange for being allowed to send ambassadors to Rome where they were granted a truce for forty years. Additionally, each state was fined five hundred thousand aes rude to be paid immediately.

Consul Postumius asked the Senate for a Triumph, as his successes were significant, but he did so more out of tradition than expectation. Yet he soon saw that some opposed it because he had left Rome late, while others objected that he had moved the troops from Samnium into Etruria without permission from the Senate. Some were his political enemies, while others were simply supporters of his co-consul, Atilius, who had also been denied a Triumph.

Angered by the rejection, Postumius said, "Senators, while respecting your authority, I'll not forget that I'm Consul. With that same authority of command by which I successfully waged wars, with Samnium and the Etruscan territory subdued, and victory and peace achieved, I shall celebrate my Triumph."

With these words, he left the Senate. Immediately, the plebeian tribunes began to dispute this. Some said they would protest against his unprecedented Triumph, while others said they would support him in defiance of their colleagues.

The matter was eventually brought before the people, and Postumius was called to attend. He pointed out that Marcus Horatius, Lucius Valerius, and his father, Gaius Marcus Rutilus, who was the current censor, had all celebrated Triumphs not by the Senate's direction, but by the command of the people. He would have made his request to the people had he not known that some plebeian tribunes, who were subservient to the nobles, would have blocked the law granting the Triumph. The people's universal approval and goodwill were, and would continue to be, more important than any decree.

And on the following day, with the support of three plebeian tribunes and against the opposition of the other seven plebeian tribunes who forbade the proceedings and against the consent of the Senate, Postumius had a Triumph, with the people celebrating the day.

The historical records for this year are inconsistent. Claudius Quadrigarius claims that Postumius, after capturing several cities in Samnium, was later defeated and wounded in Apulia. He says that Postumius retreated to Luceria with a few followers, while Atilius led the war in Etruria and celebrated a Triumph.

However, Fabius Pictor writes that the two consuls worked together in Samnium and at Luceria. He says that an army was sent to the Etruria, but he doesn't say which consul led it. He also says that many were killed on both sides at Luceria and that during this battle a Temple to Jupiter Stator was vowed there; the same vow that Romulus had made but only the area for the temple had been consecrated. Moreover, in this year at last, after the Republic had been twice bound by the same vow, it became a religious obligation, so the Senate ordered the temple to be built.