**10.41** A fierce battle broke out once joined, but it was fought with different spirits. The Romans, driven by anger, hope, a burning spirit to fight, and eager for the blood of their enemies, were quickly drawn into battle.

A large part of the Samnites, on the other hand, unwillingly fought more out of necessity and religious fear, defending rather than attacking. They wouldn't have withstood the first shout and rush of the Romans, having been defeated so many times over the years, had not another, more powerful fear weighing heavily on their hearts kept them from fleeing: the secret rite.

They remembered well that preparation of the secret rite, the armed priests, the indiscriminate slaughter of men and animals, the altars sprinkled with sacred and profane blood, the terrifying curses and the dreadful oath designed to bring ruin upon themselves, their families, and race. They were held fast by these bonds which kept them from running, making them more afraid of their own people than of the enemy.

The Romans advanced from both corners and in the center, causing great damage to the Samnites, who were paralyzed by their fear of both gods and men. The Samnites put up a weak resistance, as if fear alone kept them from fleeing. The carnage was almost at their standards when a cloud of dust appeared, as if a large army was approaching. It was Spurius Nautius, some say Octavius Maecius, leader of the auxiliary cohorts. 

The dust raised by these cohorts and their horses with the mules dragging leafy branches behind them made it seem like a larger force was approaching. Arms and standards were at first visible through the murky light, while behind, the higher and denser dust gave the appearance of a force of cavalry pressing forward. This illusion fooled not only the Samnites, but also the Romans as well.

Consul Papirius played into this deception by shouting among the first standards, loud enough for the enemy to hear, that Cominium was taken, and his victorious colleague was approaching, urging his men to finish off the enemy quickly, before the other army could claim the glory.

Having given these orders from horseback, he then instructed the tribunes and centurions to clear a path for the cavalry. Previously, he had told Trebonius and Caedicius that when they saw him raise his spear, shaking it, they should spur the cavalry into a charge with the greatest force they could against the enemy.

Everything went as planned. At a signal, the paths were opened between the ranks, and the cavalry charged through the gaps with spears fiercely raised. They rushed into the middle of the enemy column breaking through their ranks with every charge they made, causing chaos wherever they went. Volumnius and Scipio rushed in behind with their right and left wings taking advantage of the confusion to scatter the terrified.

Then, already defeated by the power of the Samnite gods and men, the Linen Legion and the Samnite cohorts scattered, abandoning their posts in total panic, both those who had sworn oaths and those who hadn't, fearing nothing but the enemy. The surviving infantry were driven into the camp or to Aquilonia. Nobility and cavalry fled to Bovianum. The Roman cavalry pursued them while Roman infantry pursued the Samnite infantry.

The two Roman wings took different routes: the right wing headed to the Samnite camp, the left wing headed to the city.

Volumnius quickly captured the camp. Scipio met more resistance at Aquilonia, not because the defeated troops had regained their courage, but because the city walls were a better defense than a rampart. The Samnites repelled the Romans with stones. Scipio, knowing that they needed to take the city while the Samnites were still panicking, asked his soldiers if they could stand the shame of the other wing having already taken the camp, while they, despite their victories, were being driven back from the city gate. When they all loudly declared that they couldn't, Scipio led the charge to the gate, his shield raised over his head. The rest followed, their shields joined together in a testudo formation, and they broke Aquilonia, scattering the Samnites near the gate and taking the walls. However, they didn't venture further into the city due to their small numbers.