**10.43** Consul Carvilius had a similar success at Cominium. He led his forces to the city walls at dawn, surrounding the city and placing strong guards at the gates to prevent any escape. As he was about to give the signal to attack, he received a distressing message from his colleague about the march of twenty Samnite cohorts.

The news not only delayed his assault but also forced him to withdraw some of his troops that were in formation and ready to attack. He instructed Decimus Brutus Scaeva, his legate, to take the first legion, ten auxiliary cohorts, and the cavalry to confront the Samnite reinforcements. Stop and detain the enemy wherever they encountered them, he ordered, and engage in battle if the opportunity arose. Above all, they weren't to let these troops get near Cominium. 

He then ordered the scaling ladders to be brought to all sides of the city walls and advanced toward the gates under the protection of a testudo. At the same time, the gates were being broken open and the city walls were assaulted from all sides. 

At first, the Samnites, before they saw armed men on the walls, had enough courage to prevent the Romans from entering the city. Now, when the fighting was no longer carried on at a distance with missiles but in face-to-face combat, they faced opponents who had painfully scaled the walls from the plain, and were now in the very place the Samnites had most feared losing. The Samnites fought easily, on equal terms, against an enemy already weakened by the difficult climb.

The Samnites abandoned the towers and walls and retreated to their forum. There, they made a final attempt to turn the tide of the battle, but soon they threw away their arms and surrendered to the Consul. A total of eleven thousand four hundred Samnites were captured and four thousand eight hundred and eighty were killed. 

This was the situation at Cominium and Aquilonia.

In the area between the two cities, where a third battle was expected, the enemy was nowhere to be found. They had been called back by their countrymen when they were within seven miles of Cominium and didn't participate in either battle.

At nightfall, when they were close to the camp and Aquilonia, the enemy heard shouts of danger from both places and stopped. Then in the region of the camp, which had been set on fire by the Romans, the flames spread out widely preventing them from advancing any further. They took  that as a sign of a more certain defeat. In that very place they spent the night in great anxiety, lying on the ground at random without stopping to remove their arms, barely sleeping, alternately hoping for and fearing the dawn.

At first light, while they were still unsure of where to go, they were spotted by Roman cavalry and immediately fled. The cavalry had been pursuing the Samnites who had left the town during the night and saw the unprotected group with neither a rampart nor guards. This same group was also seen from the walls of Aquilonia and now the legionary cohorts joined in the pursuit. The infantry couldn't catch up with them, but the cavalry killed about two hundred and eighty of their rear guard. In their panic, they left behind a large number of arms and eighteen military standards. The rest of the column reached Bovianum unharmed, as safe as could be expected after such a chaotic retreat.