**10.47** Now that the year was over, the new plebeian tribunes had taken office. Due to some irregularities in two of the appointments, replacements were made within five days. That year a lustrum was completed by the censors, Publius Cornelius Arvina and Gaius Marcius Rutilus. They were the twenty-sixth censors since the first one and this was the nineteenth purification ceremony.  The number of citizens counted was two hundred sixty-two thousand three hundred and twenty-one.

In this year, people who had been awarded crowns or garlands for their meritorious behavior in war began to wear them at the Roman Games. For the first time, victors were given palms, a custom borrowed from Greece.

And in this same year the curule aediles, who had organized the games, fined several cattle ranchers for illegal grazing.  The fines were used to complete the road paved with stone from the Temple of Mars to Bovillae.

Lucius Papirius oversaw the consular elections and announced Quintus Fabius Maximus Gurges, son of the famous Quintus Fabius Maximus Rullianus, and Decius Junius Brutus Scaeva as consuls. Papirius himself was made praetor.

Despite many successes, this year was marred by a devastating plague that affected both the city and the countryside, causing a high number of deaths. The disaster was now like a portent. The Sibylline Books were consulted to see what the end was or what remedy the gods would give for this evil. It was found in the Books that Asclepius, the god of healing, must be brought to Rome from Epidaurus. However, no action was taken that year due to the consuls' involvement in the war. The only step taken was a one-day supplication performed to Asclepius.