**10.42** Consul Papirius was unaware of these events. He was busy sending his troops back to the camp as the sun was setting and the impending night made every location seem risky and threatening, even for the victorious soldiers.

After riding a significant distance, he noticed the captured Samnite camp on his right and, on the left, there was a roar from the city and a mingled sound of fighting and cries of fear and panic. This was happening while the battle was taking place at the gate.

As he rode closer on horseback, he saw his own soldiers on the city walls and realized that resistance was broken. He was pleased that the rash actions of a few had given him the chance for great achievement. He commanded the soldiers he had sent back to the camp to return and bring the standards into the city. They entered the city from the nearest side, but as night was falling, they remained quiet. During the night the city was deserted by the enemy. On that day, twenty thousand three hundred and forty Samnites were killed at Aquilonia, and three thousand eight hundred and seventy were captured, along with ninety-seven military standards.

Historians have noted one particular detail about Papirius: hardly any other general was seen on the battlefield with a more cheerful expression; it was unknown whether this was due to his natural disposition or his confidence in victory. His strong will also meant that he didn't let the dispute about the auspices distract him from the war. In the midst of the battle, as was customary, he made a vow to Jupiter the Victorious. He promised that if he defeated the enemy's legions, he would drink a small cup of honeyed wine before he drank any strong drink himself. This type of vow was well-received by the gods, and they guided the auspices to a successful outcome.