**6.21** Following the outbreak of disease, there was a shortage of crops. When the rumors of these disasters spread to hostile neighbors, numerous wars followed in the subsequent year. Serving as consular tribunes were Lucius Valerius for the fourth time, Aulus Manlius for the third time, Servius Sulpicius for the third time, Lucius Lucretius for the second time, Lucius Aemilius for the third time, and Marcus Trebonius.

Unexpectedly, the people of Lanuvium, previously a loyal city, became new adversaries. This was in addition to the Volscians, who seemed destined to fight the Romans forever, the colonies of Circeii and Velitrae, who had long been contemplating defection, and the Latins, who were also under suspicion.

The senators believed Lanuvium acted out of contempt because the citizens of Velitrae, who were Roman citizens, had been allowed to revolt so long without punishment. Therefore, the Senate decreed that a proposal should be presented to the Roman people at the earliest opportunity to declare war against them. To make the plebeians more inclined to support this, they appointed five commissioners to distribute the Pomptine land and three commissioners to lead a colony to Nepete. The proposal for war was then put to the people. Despite the plebeian tribunes' attempts to dissuade them, all tribes voted for war. 

That year, preparations for war were made, but the army ended up not being deployed due to the worsening disease outbreak. The delay allowed the Velitrae colonists time to plead with the Senate. A large part of the population was in favor of sending a delegation to Rome as humble supplicants. However, as usual, those of the Velitrae who had instigated the rebellion, fearing they alone would be held accountable and punished by the Romans, discouraged peace talks out of self-preservation, thus implicating the entire colony. They not only hindered the delegation to the Senate but also incited a large portion of the people to raid Roman territory, eliminating any hope of peace.

That year, rumors began to circulate about a rebellion in Praeneste. When the people of Tusculum, Gabii, and Labici, accused Praeneste of raiding their territories, the Senate's response was so calm that it was clear they didn't fully believe the accusations, hoping they were untrue.