**6.23** The same passion of the enemy was also present in the Roman army, but the battle was delayed on account of the wisdom and authority of one man. Camillus sought to extend the war by using the delay as a strategy to supplement their resources and build strength.

The enemy became aware of what the Romans were doing, so they pushed even harder. They not only arranged their troops for battle in front of their camp, but also moved into the center of the field, bringing their standards almost up to the Roman rampart and displaying the proud confidence their numbers gave them. This mortified the Roman soldiers, but enraged the other consular tribune, Lucius Furius, whose youth and natural temperament made him hot-tempered. He became even more headstrong from the baseless enthusiasm of the rank-and-file soldiers.

Furius further roused the already agitated Roman soldiers by undermining his colleague's authority due to his age. Wars were for the young, he said, and, with age, both the body and mind decline. His colleague was a procrastinator. On arrival, Camillus was ready to capture the camps and cities in a single rush. Now, he was wasting time in the rampart hoping that the enemy would become weaker or that the Romans would become stronger? What opportunity, what moment, or what ground for an ambush was he waiting for? The old man's plans were cold and weak. Camillus already had enough of life and glory. Why should they let the strength of a state, which should be immortal, grow old along with the mortal body of one man?

With these remarks, the whole camp turned against Camillus and began demanding a battle. Lucius Furius said to his colleague, "Marcus Furius Camillus, we can't resist the soldiers' fervor. The enemy, made more courageous by our delay, insults us with unbearable arrogance. Yield to the will of all and allow yourself to be overruled in counsel, so that you may win the war sooner." 

Camillus replied that in all the wars he had led, neither he nor the Roman people had been dissatisfied with his judgment or luck. He acknowledged that he now had a colleague who was his equal in command and authority, and vigorous in age. He was used to leading the army, not being led, though he wouldn't interfere with the command of his colleague. However, with the gods' favor, let him proceed what he believed was in the state's best interest. Camillus asked for leniency due to his age, that he not be placed in the front line, but that he would not fail in those duties that belong to an old man in war. He prayed to the gods that no misfortune would make his cautious advice appear to be the right choice after all.

But his wise advice was not heeded by the soldiers, nor were his devout prayers heard by the gods. 

Lucius Furius, the advocate of the battle, arranged the front line. Camillus formed the reserve and placed a strong guard before the camp. He positioned himself on a high place to anxiously watch the outcome of the Furius' plan.