**6.27** Camillus, known for his wisdom and courage in the Volscian war and his success in the Tusculan campaign, distinguished in both cases by his patience and moderation toward his colleague, stepped down from his position after holding elections. The consular tribunes for the next year were Lucius and Publius Valerius, Lucius for the fifth time, Publius for the third, and Gaius Sergius for the third time, Lucius Menenius for the second time, Spurius Papirius, and Servius Cornelius Maluginensis.

The year also required censors, mainly because no one knew how bad the debt crisis was. The plebeian tribunes intensified the public resentment about it. It was felt that the patricians were downplaying the problem as it was advantageous to say that the debt was due to people not paying what was owed rather than saying that people were struggling because they were genuinely poor.

The censors appointed were Gaius Sulpicius Camerinus and Spurius Postumius Regillensis. However, the work, which had already begun, was interrupted by the death of Postumius. After Sulpicius resigned because of the religious law against appointing a replacement censor of a colleague, other censors were appointed, but they didn't fulfill their duties also due to a religious conflict. To appoint a third set of censors was also considered a religious conflict as it was thought the gods were against the office for that year.

The plebeian tribunes refused to tolerate this mockery of the people. arguing that the Senate was avoiding public records of property because they didn't want the debt's size to be known. It would show that part of the population had been ruined, while the indebted plebeians were being exposed to one war after another. The Senate was intentionally starting wars to distract the plebeians and prevent them from focusing on their rights. War, they claimed, was sought from everywhere.  Legions were marched from Antium to Satricum, from Satricum to Velitrae, and then legions were led to Tusculum.  Now the Latins, the Hernicians, and Praeneste were to be the focus of war and all because of a hatred of the plebeians, not the enemy. They wanted to wear the plebeians out by fighting. They did not want to allow them time in the City to rest, enjoy their freedoms, or take their place at the assembly where they could hear the voices of the plebeian tribunes about reducing debt and removing other grievances. This was the real goal.

The tribunes then urged the plebeians to remember their ancestors' fight for freedom and resist attempts of any Roman citizen to be handed over as a slave for debt, nor permit a draft to be held until the amount of debt was inspected and a plan for reducing it was made. Then each person could know what belongs to them and what belongs to another, and whether their own body remained free or whether that too was owed to the treasury.

The reward for a rebellion, once offered, quickly led to a rebellion as many were seized for their debts and, at the same time, the Senate decreed that new legions should be drafted due to rumors of hostilities at Praeneste. Both actions were met with resistance from the plebeian tribunes and the plebeians. The plebeian tribunes prevented those assigned to their creditors from being imprisoned, and the young men refused to enlist.

The Senate was more concerned about the draft than enforcing the debts since it was reported that the enemy had left Praeneste and settled in the territory of Gabii. The plebeian tribunes weren't deterred by these reports. The only thing that would calm the City's unrest was the threat of war reaching the walls of Rome.