**6.30** An election was then held for consular tribunes. The number of patricians and plebeians was equal. From the patricians were chosen Publius Manlius Capitolinus and Gaius Manlius Vulso, along with Lucius Julius Iullus for the second time. The plebeians elected Gaius Sextilius, Marcus Albinius, and Lucius Antistius. The Manlii, Publius and Gaius, though plebeians by family origin, had more influence than Julius, and for that reason were assigned the province of the Volscians. This was done without the usual drawing of lots, or mutual agreement, and outside the usual order. Both the Manlii and the patricians who gave them this assignment later regretted it.

Without any prior scouting, they sent out some troops to gather supplies. When a false report came in that these men were trapped, they rushed to provide assistance. In their haste, they didn't verify the report, nor retain the person who had lied to them – an enemy dressed as a Roman soldier. The soldiers fell straight into an ambush.

While the Romans were fighting, courageously holding their ground in a disadvantageous position, suffering heavy casualties but inflicting them as well, the enemy attacked the undefended Roman camp lying on a plain. On both sides, the recklessness and incompetence of the generals put both locations in danger. Whatever fortune remained to the Roman people was protected only by the soldiers' steadfast bravery, even without a leader.

When news of these events reached Rome, the people initially wanted to appoint a dictator. But when they heard that things were calm in the Volscian territory, and it was clear that the enemy didn't know how to take advantage of their victory, the army and generals were called back. As far as the Volscians were concerned, there was peace. The only trouble at the end of the year was that the Praenestines, stirred up by some Latin states, started fighting again. 

That same year, new colonists were assigned to Setia because the colony complained about a lack of men. Amid the turmoil of military affairs, domestic peace, from the influence and authority of the consular tribunes among the plebeians and the respect they had among their own people, was a source of consolation.