**3.11** However, the consuls, who had intentionally placed their chairs within sight of the tribunes, continued to draft soldiers for the upcoming war. The tribunes quickly hurried toward them, bringing the assembly of plebeians with them. A few of these plebeians were called to be drafted, as an experiment, and immediately, violence broke out. Whomever the lictors grabbed, under the consuls' orders, the tribunes then ordered to be released. There were no boundaries to anyone's authority, and whatever the consuls wanted, they tried to achieve through force.

The tribunes worked to obstruct the draft just as the patricians worked to obstruct the Terentillian Law, which was brought forward every assembly day. A quarrel would break out as soon as the tribunes ordered the plebeians to vote because the patricians refused to leave, blocking an orderly setup for the vote. The older citizens barely participated in the conflict, as it seemed to be driven not by wisdom, but by emotion and recklessness. The consuls also generally stayed away to avoid any insult to their dignity in the chaos.

There was a young patrician, Caeso, from the Quinctius family who was bold both because of his noble lineage and his physical size and strength. To those god-given attributes he had also added many military honors and was eloquent in the Forum. No one in the state was considered more effective in speech or action. When he stood in the middle of a group of senators, he was noticeable above the rest. Because his eloquence and physical strength seemed to combine the powers of a dictator and a consul, he often alone stood against the tribunes' attacks and the plebeians' fury. He frequently took the lead in driving out the tribunes from the Forum and in causing the plebeians to scatter. Anybody who stood in his way was left beaten and stripped naked. It became clear that if he continued this way, the Terentillian Law would be defeated.

Then, when the other tribunes were almost defeated, Aulus Verginius, one of the tribunes, brought a capital charge against Caeso for his outrageous behavior. Instead of becoming intimidated, this inflamed Caeso and made him even more aggressive. He fought against the Terentillian Law more fiercely than ever, stirred up the plebeians, and treated the tribunes as if they were enemies in a just war.

Verginius let Caeso continue his reckless behavior not just because it added to the charges against him, but that it also stirred up public anger toward the patricians. Verginius continued to promote the Terentillian Law, not so much with the hope of passing it, but just to provoke Caeso and make him become even more reckless. Many of the younger patricians' thoughtless words and actions were now being blamed on Caeso, which only strengthened the case against him. Still, the Terentillian Law was resisted.

Verginius asked the plebeians, "Do you now realize, Quirites, that you can't have Caeso as a fellow citizen with the Terentillian Law you want? Why do I even mention law; Caeso is against your freedom. He's more arrogant than all the Tarquins. You already see him acting like a king over you with his strength and audacity. Just wait until he becomes a consul or dictator!" Many agreed, complaining that they had been beaten by him, and strongly encouraged Verginius to continue prosecuting Caeso.