**3.9** The situation in Rome returned to its previous state, and successes in war immediately caused unrest in the City. Gaius Terentillus Harsa or Arsa was a plebeian tribune that year. He saw an opportunity for political maneuvering during the consuls' absence.

For several days, Terentillus publicly criticized the patricians' arrogance, focusing mainly on the excessive and unbearable power of the consuls' authority in a free state. Although the consuls' authority was less offensive in theory, in reality, their authority was even more oppressive than a king's. Two leaders were chosen instead of just one, and both had unrestrained, infinite power. This meant that consuls, unbounded and unchecked, tended to direct all the harshness of the law and all forms of severity against the plebeians.

To prevent this unchecked power from continuing indefinitely, Terentillus proposed a law to appoint five people to draft laws regarding consular power. The consuls should only use the power that the people granted them, and the consuls shouldn't make their own laws based on their own lust and unchecked behavior.

When this "Terentillian Law" was announced, the senators immediately became fearful that they would be subjected to oppression in the absence of the consuls, so Quintus Fabius, former consul now City prefect, called them into session. He spoke so strongly against the bill and its author, that the threats and intimidation couldn't have been greater even if the two consuls had been standing by Terentillus, threatening his life.

Fabius accused the tribune of being an opportunist and seizing upon an opportunity to attack the state. If the City had a tribune like him the previous year, during the plague and war, it would have been disastrous. Finding both consuls dead, the citizens stricken with disease, and confusion everywhere, Terentillus would have proposed a law to do away with the consular government, and it would have definitely led the Volscians and the Aequians to lay siege to the City. Was this what he wanted? Was it not enough that consuls who acted cruelly against any citizen could be brought up on charges in court by the tribunes? After all, the tribunes had the power to set a trial date for consuls. The tribunes had the power to bring the consul before the very judges whom the consul may have mistreated. It wasn't the consular authority but tribunal power that was becoming hateful and unbearable. Tribunal power, which had been peaceful and reconciled with the Senate, was about to return to its former, evil ways.

Fabius stopped pleading with Terentillus to stop his actions and addressed the tribunes as a group. "It's to you other tribunes," he cried, "whom I ask to reflect upon this fact: your power was conferred on you for the purpose of assisting individual citizens, not for the destruction of us all. You were elected tribunes of the plebeians, not enemies of the senators."

"It's brings misery to us and disgrace to you for you to attack a deserted Republic, weakened and without its consuls. It won't reduce your authority but instead it will reduce the hate against you if you work with your colleague to postpone the question until the consuls return. Even the Aequians and the Volscians, last year, when disease had killed the consuls, refrained from pressing a cruel and pitiless war against us."

The tribunes spoke with Terentillus, and the bill, which seemed to be postponed, was abandoned. The consuls were immediately called back.
