**2.56** The plebeians, who strongly supported Volero, elected him as plebeian tribune in the next election for the year in which Lucius Pinarius and Publius Furius served as consuls.

Despite expectations that Volero would use his position to harass the previous year's consuls, he prioritized public interest over his own personal grudges. He didn't criticize the consuls but instead proposed a law that plebeian tribunes should be elected at the Comitia by the tribes.

The proposal seemed harmless at first, but it actually took away the power of the patricians to elect tribunes of their choice through the votes of their clients. This matter was welcomed by the plebeians. The Senate strongly opposed this proposal. There was one small vote, a veto, by some member of the tribune college. Despite their efforts, the Senate could not convince any of their colleagues, either consuls or patricians, to protest against it. The issue carried its own momentum and dragged on throughout the rest of the year without resolution.

The plebeians re-elected Volero as tribune the following year. The patricians, anticipating a battle that might escalate into a crisis, elected Appius Claudius Crassus and Titus Quinctius Capitolinus as consuls. Even before he had taken office, Appius had a history of being hated by the plebeians as he was the son of the earlier Appius Claudius and he was hostile to them since his father's battles.

At the start of the year, this new proposed law allowing plebeians to elect their own representatives, the Lex Publilia, was the single most important issue. Although Tribune Volero initiated it, his colleague, Tribune Gaius Laetorius, was a fresher and fiercer advocate whose courage in battle made him bold and there was no one his age more skilled in combat. While Volero focused on the law and avoided criticizing the consuls, Laetorius accused Appius and his family of being arrogant and cruel towards the Roman plebeians. Appius, he said, was elected by the patricians not as a consul, but as a butcher to torment and tear apart the plebeians. Being more a soldier than a speaker, his words didn't show his spirit and enthusiasm. Running out of words, he said, "I have difficulty speaking my mind to prove what I've said," he told them. "Quirites, be here tomorrow to support me. I'll either die here in your presence or carry through the law."

On the next day, the tribunes seized the speaker's platform in the Comitium before anyone else. The consuls and patricians gathered in the assembly to block the law. Laetorius ordered everyone except voters to leave, but the young patricians ignored the tribune's attendant and refused to go, so he ordered them to be arrested. Consul Appius declared that a plebeian tribune had no authority over anyone except a plebeian. Laetorius could not even remove them by force, according to ancestral custom. All he was allowed to say was "If it pleases you, Quirites, depart." Appius then confused Laetorius by contemptuously debating the legalities.

Laetorius, enraged, sent his attendant to Consul Appius, who responded by sending his own lictor back to the tribune, shouting at him that Laetorius was a private citizen who had no authority or office. Laetorius would have been roughly treated except the entire assembly rose up, angrily, to defend the tribune against the Consul. As this was happening, a rush of men from the whole city flooded into the Forum and joined the excited crowd to support the tribune. Despite the mounting tension, Appius Claudius stood firm.

The situation could have escalated into bloodshed if not for the intervention of Consul Quinctius, who ordered the senators who had been prior consuls to remove Appius from the Forum with force, if necessary. Quinctius then tried to calm the angry plebeians with entreaties, then begged the tribunes to dismiss the assembly, to give them time to calm down, assuring them that a delay wouldn't diminish their power but would add wisdom to their strength. He also promised that the senators would be under the power of the plebeians, just as the consuls would be under the power of the senators.