**2.59** The Volscians became aware of the situation and pushed forward with increased energy. They hoped that the Roman army would resist Consul Appius just as they had resisted Consul Fabius in the past. In truth, the Roman army's hostility towards Appius was even stronger than it had been toward Fabius. Unlike Fabius' army who merely refused to win, the current army actively wanted to lose. When they were led to the battlefield, they retreated to their camp in a shameful flight. They only stood their ground when they saw the Volscians charging the standards against their ramparts and shamefully slaughtering their rear guard. At that point, they fought to prevent the nearly victorious enemy from breaching their ramparts. It was clear that the Roman soldiers didn't want their camp to be captured, but in all other areas they took pride in their defeat and humiliation.

Despite these circumstances, Appius remained resolute and wanted to rage and punish even more. When he called an assembly, the legates and military tribunes rushed to him, warning him not to try to see how far he could stretch his authority, for his authority wholly depended upon the free consent of those who obeyed it. The soldiers refused to attend the assembly, and their complaints could be heard everywhere, demanding that the camp be moved away from Volscian territory. The generals warned him that the enemy had recently been at their gates and ramparts, and that there weren't only suspicions of a serious mutiny, but the evidence was now right before their eyes. Eventually, Appius gave in, realizing that they were gaining nothing but a delay in their punishment. He dismissed the assembly and orders were issued for a march the next morning.

At dawn, the trumpet gave the signal for the march. As the column moved out of the camp, the Volscians, as if they had been alerted by the same signal, attacked the Romans from the rear. The panic spread to the front, causing such confusion that standards and formations were disrupted, commands could not be heard, and lines could not be formed. Everyone was focused on escaping.

In chaos, the soldiers scattered, jumping over piles of dead bodies and discarded weapons. They only escaped because the Volscians eventually stopped pursuing them.

At length, the Consul Appius tried to gather his own men, vainly pursuing the scattered troops until they gradually came together again. The Consul ordered the camp to be placed inside a peaceful field which had been undisturbed by war. After this was done, he then called up the men for an assembly.

At the convened assembly, he chastised the army as traitors for their betrayal of military discipline and desertion of their standards. He then demanded to know from each soldier, individually, where his missing standard was or where his missing weapon was. Every unarmed soldier who had thrown away his weapon was identified, as was every standard bearer who had lost his standard, every centurion who had deserted his ranks, and every veteran who had previously been awarded extra rations for bravery in the past and had still abandoned his comrades. All were ordered to be beaten with rods and then executed by beheading.

As for the rest of the soldiers, every tenth soldier was selected, by lot, and then executed.