**3.15** The next consuls, Gaius Claudius Sabinus, son of Appius Claudius, and Publius Valerius Publicola, \[descendant of one of the original consuls, Publius Valerius Publicola\], found Rome in a peaceful state. The new year hadn't brought any changes.

Political focus still remained on proposing the Terentillian Law or passing it, and this occupied everyone's mind. The younger senators tried to win the favor of the plebeians, but the tribunes worked even harder to oppose them. The tribunes made the senators look suspicious to the plebeians by claiming that there was a conspiracy, that Caeso was in Rome, and that there were plans to assassinate the tribunes and massacre the plebeians. The tribunes also claimed that the older senators had ordered the young men to remove the tribune's power from the Republic and return the government to its previous form before the occupation of the Sacred Mount.

There were fears of war from the Volscians and Aequians, which had become such a routine thing that the people had developed anxiety from knowing that it would happen every year, like clockwork.

Another problem arose, unexpectedly, closer to home. Exiles and slaves, approximately two thousand five hundred men, took over the Capitoline Hill and the Citadel at night. Their leader was Appius Herdonius, a Sabine. Those in the Citadel who didn't want to join the conspirators and take up arms were instantly massacred. Others, in. the midst of the chaos, rushed headlong down to the Forum in terror. The cries of "To arms!" and "The enemy is in the City!" were heard alternately.

The consuls were afraid to arm the plebeians, but they were also afraid to leave them unarmed. The consuls were unsure what sudden disaster had hit Rome, whether it was internal or external, or was due to plebeian hatred, or from a slave conspiracy. The consuls tried to calm the chaos, but by trying to control it, they made it worse. In their frightened and terrified state, the plebeians couldn't be controlled. The consuls eventually distributed weapons, but not to the common people, and only so far as to have a reliable enough guard for all purposes against an unknown enemy. They posted guards at convenient places throughout the City during the night, worried and unsure about who and how many enemies there actually were.

When daylight came, the war and its leader were revealed. Appius Herdonius called from the Capitoline Hill, announcing that this was an opportunity for the slaves to win their freedom. This fight was for the most miserable of all, to bring back those who had been wrongfully exiled, and to remove the heavy yoke of slavery from them. They would rather do this with the approval of the Roman people; however, if this was a hopeless request, they would take the risky path of stirring up the Volscians and Aequians and any other extreme course they could take.