**3.16** The situation started to become clearer to the senators and the consuls. However, they feared that this could be a plot by the Veientes or Sabines. With so many enemies already in the City, they worried that the Sabine and Etruscan forces might attack as part of a planned strategy. The consuls and patricians also feared that their long-time enemies, the Volscians and Aequians, might not just invade their lands as before, but now attack their City, as though it was now already partially captured.

The patricians had many fears, and one of the most significant was the fear of their slaves. They were worried that each house might be harboring an enemy, someone who was neither safe to trust nor safe to distrust, as not trusting them might make them more hostile and determined.

And harmony in the City seemed hard to maintain. During so many overwhelming and threatening dangers, no one feared the tribunes or the plebeians. That problem was now under control, as it only broke out whenever there was peace, and right now it was focused on the fear of foreign aggression. Yet, this issue, more than anything else, proved to be a problem in a time of crisis. So great was the frenzy of the tribunes as they argued that the war was not a real war, which had taken possession of the Capitol, but a fake image of war, in order to distract the plebeians from the Terentillian Law. The tribunes claimed that the patricians' friends and clients would leave even quieter than they arrived once they had realized that their noisy efforts to prevent the passing of the Terentillian Law were useless. The tribunes then summoned the people to put their arms aside and hold a council to pass the Terentillian Law.

Meanwhile, the consuls called a meeting of the Senate, revealing themselves to be in greater fear of the tribunes than any enemy who had attacked by night.