**3.18** On the same night, messengers from Rome arrived in Tusculum with news that the Citadel had been captured, the Capitoline Hill seized, and the City was in another state of chaos. At that time, Lucius Mamilius was the dictator in Tusculum. He quickly called a meeting of the Tusculum senate and introduced the messengers. Mamilius strongly suggested that they shouldn't wait for ambassadors from Rome to come requesting help. The criticality of the situation, their treaties, and even the gods, themselves, called upon them to act. The gods, he said, would never give them a better chance to help earn the gratitude of such a powerful and close neighbor. The Tusculum senate resolved to send help.

Young Tusculum men were enlisted and issued arms. As the Tusculum allies arrived in Rome at dawn, they were initially thought to be enemies from a distance. It seemed as if the Aequians or Volscians were invading. Once the misunderstanding was cleared up, the Tusculum allies were allowed into the City and they gathered in the Forum where Consul Valerius, who had left Consul Claudius to direct the troops guarding the gates, was preparing the line for battle.

The personal influence of Valerius had won. He assured the people that when the Capitoline Hill was recovered and peace was restored to the City, he would like to show everyone the fraud that was hidden in the Terentillian Law that the tribunes were trying to pass. He would not hinder the assembly of the people as he was mindful of his heritage, mindful of the surname Publicola, 'the people's friend', by which the hereditary care of the people had been handed down to him by his ancestors.

Despite the tribunes' efforts to restrain them, Valerius led the troops up the Capitoline Hill where they formed a battle line with the legion from Tusculum alongside them. Both allies and citizens competed for the honor of reclaiming the Citadel. Each leader rallied his own men. The enemy's morale diminished when they realized they could only rely on their strategic location for protection, and nothing else.

The Romans and allies advanced with their standards, bursting into the temple's vestibule when Consul Valerius, who was fighting in the front, was killed while directing the attack. Publius Volumnius, a former consul, saw him fall. He ordered his men to cover the body and took over the consul's duties. The Roman soldiers were so eager and aggressive that they didn't realize what had happened; they won the battle before they realized they were fighting without a leader. Many of the exiles were cut down, staining the temple with their blood. Others were captured alive. Appius Herdonius, the leader, was killed.

The Capitoline Hill was thus reclaimed, cleansed and purified. The prisoners were punished according to their status, whether they were free or enslaved. A vote of thanks was given from the Senate to the Tusculans for their bravery. It's said that the plebeians threw a quarter of an aes rude each into Consul Valerius' house so that he could be carried out with a more magnificent funeral than he would have had otherwise.