**1.18** Numa Pompilius was a man known for his justice and piety. He lived in Cures, the capital city of the Sabines, and was considered the wisest man of the time, as anyone could be in that age. He was highly knowledgeable in all human and divine laws.

They falsely attribute that the great Pythagoras of Samos was his philosophy teacher, but I find that no evidence supports this. Pythagoras was known to teach young men in the furthest coast of Italy, around Metapontum, Heraclea, and Crotona. But this was more than a hundred years later during the reign of Servius Tullius. Even if Pythagoras had been teaching at the same time as Numa, it's unlikely that his fame would have reached the Sabines, or that they would have been able to communicate due to language differences. It's also hard to believe that Pythagoras could have traveled safely through so many different nations with differences in language and manners. I think, therefore, it's more likely that Numa was naturally intelligent and was virtuous, not so much by his travels but by the rigid discipline of the ancient Sabines, who were known for their strictness and uncorrupted ways.

When the senators heard Numa's name, for the Sabines were inclined to support their king, they knew that choosing a king from the Sabines would shift the balance of power in Rome. However, nobody dared to put themselves or anyone else before Numa. They all agreed that Numa Pompilius should be king.

As Romulus had done before him, Numa asked the gods for their approval before taking the throne. An augur, a religious official who interpreted the flight of birds, led him to the Citadel, where he sat on a stone facing south.

The augur took his seat to the left of Numa. He had his head covered, and he held in his right hand a curved staff without a knot which they called a lituus. Then, having looked over the city and the countryside, he prayed to the gods and determined the regions from east to west, saying that the right side was to the south and the left side was to the north. Looking as far as the eye could see, he set the sacred boundary for divine signs in his mind; then, transferring the lituus to his left hand, and placing his right hand on Numa's head, he prayed, "Father Jupiter, if it is right that this man, Numa Pompilius, whose head I hold, should be king of Rome, show us certain signs between those boundaries that I have made."

Then he completed the auspices with words which told the gods which omens to send. When the divine signs were shown, Numa was officially declared king and descended from the temple having received approval of the gods.