**1.21** The entire community shifted its focus away from violence and war, and more toward resolving issues. This change of heart was influenced by its belief in the gods' constant presence. The people felt that the divine beings were interested in human affairs, filling everyone with a sense of piety. It led to faith and religious duties guiding the state, instead of the fear of laws and punishments.

As the people started to follow Numa's moral example, even the neighboring states, who once saw the City as a threat to peace, began to respect it. They thought it was wrong to disturb a state so devoted to worshipping the gods.

There was a grove with a spring of perpetually running water in the middle, flowing from a dark cave. Numa often visited this place alone, claiming to meet with a goddess. He dedicated this place to the Camenae, the goddesses of childbirth and fountains, believing that it was the site of their sacred meetings with his divine consort, Egeria.

Numa also started a yearly festival to honor Fides \[goddess of Faith\], ordering that the flamines be taken to her temple in covered chariots pulled by two horses. They were to perform the religious service with their hands wrapped up to their fingers. This symbolized that Fides should be protected and that it should hold a sacred place within the right hand.

He established many other religious rituals and dedicated places for them, which the priests called Argei.

King Numa's most outstanding achievement was maintaining peace throughout his reign, just as much as his royal authority. Thus, two successive kings, one through war and the other through peace, increased the City. King Romulus ruled for thirty-seven years and King Numa for forty-three years. The City was now both powerful and skilled in the art of war and the art of peace.