**1.22** After King Numa's death, an interregnum occurred where there was a period without a ruler until the Roman people chose Tullus Hostilius as their third king. He was the grandson of the same Hostilius who had bravely fought against the Sabines at the foot of the Capitoline Hill and died in battle. The Senate approved of this choice.

King Tullus wasn't like Numa. He was more warlike and more aggressive than even Romulus was. His youth, strength, and his grandfather's fame fueled his ambition. Tullus felt the City was growing weak from too much idleness, so he sought reasons for stirring up war.

During this time, some Roman farmers began raiding the lands of Alba Longa, and the Alban farmers retaliated by raiding the Roman lands in return. At that time, Gaius Cluilius was the ruler of Alba Longa. Both sides sent ambassadors almost simultaneously to ask for their property back. 

Tullus had ordered his ambassadors not to do anything before executing his orders. He knew that Cluilius would refuse, thus giving Rome a just reason to declare war on the Albans.

The Alban ambassadors, however, acted more carelessly, wasting time. Tullus received them with hospitality and they celebrated the king's banquet together.

Meanwhile, the Roman ambassadors had already asked the Albans for their goods back first, and, when Cluilius refused, the ambassadors declared war on the Albans, to begin in thirty days. They returned and informed Tullus that Cluilius had refused.

Knowing that the Alban ambassadors weren't current on the latest news, Tullus allowed them to meet with him personally and state their demands. The ambassadors wasted time offering apologies, saying that they didn't want to upset Tullus, but were following orders. They then formally demanded the return of the stolen property. If they didn't get them back, they were ordered to declare war.

To this Tullus responded, "Tell your king that the king of the Romans calls on the gods to witness; whichever nation first dismissed the ambassadors asking for their goods back, may they suffer all the calamities of this war."