**1.23** The Alban ambassadors returned home with this message. Both sides prepared for war the with utmost effort. It was a war very similar to a civil war, more like a family feud than a war descended from the Trojan lineage. The Romans came from the Alban kings, who came from Alba Longa, which came from Lavinium, which had been founded by Trojans. The war ultimately ended without any major battles, which made the conflict less tragic. Instead of a large loss of life, the buildings of Alba would be destroyed, and two nations, Rome and Alba, would merge into one.

The Albans were the first to move, setting up camp five miles from the City and surrounding the camp with a trench. For several centuries this trench was named Fossa Cluilia after their general, Gaius Cluilius, until it became obsolete. It was within this camp that the Alban king died suddenly. Mettius Fufetius was then made dictator of the Albans.

Meanwhile, King Tullus, angry by the war and emboldened by Cluilius' death, proclaimed that the gods would punish the entire Alban people for starting an impious war, beginning with their king's death. Accordingly, he led his agitated army past the enemy's camp at night and invaded Alban territory.

Mettius Fufetius, now forced to act by Tullus, left his camp and brought his forces as close to the Romans as possible. He then sent a messenger to Tullus, asking for a meeting before they fought, as he felt that he had information that was beneficial to both Rome and Alba Longa. Tullus, not entirely opposed to the meeting, still prepared his army in case the meeting led to nothing. The Albans did the same.

Once both armies assembled in formation and were ready, their leaders came forward into the middle of the battlefield with a few nobles. Fufetius started the conversation. "I remember our late king, King Clulius, saying that this war was caused by unresolved disputes of property and broken treaties. I've no doubt, Tullus, that you claim the same. However, if we're honest with ourselves, you and I, our true reason is the desire for power over one another which has stimulated our two related and neighboring peoples to arms. I don't know if this war is right or wrong; it was the decision of King Clulius, but I was chosen to lead the Albans in carrying on this war."

"I'd like to remind you, Tullus, about the powerful Etruscans who surround us, especially you. You know full well which one of us is closer to them. These people are strong on land and even stronger at sea. The second you signal your men to charge into battle, the Etruscans will be watching the spectacle and waiting, ready to attack both the exhausted winner and vanquished loser. Therefore, if the gods favor it, I propose we find a way to avoid losing our freedom for the uncertain fate of victory or slavery. Instead, let's decide between ourselves who'll rule the other without causing too much damage or loss of life for both people."

Tullus made no objection, even though he was naturally inclined to violence and was hopeful of victory. While both sides considered what to do, a plan soon presented itself which seemed to be provided by Fortune itself.