**1.24** It so happened that in both armies at that time there were sets of triplet brothers, all the same age and strength. It is quite certain that they were known as the Horatii and Curiatii and there is hardly any other ancient event more noble. Despite the fame of the event, it's unclear which group belonged to which nation. Some ancient sources say the Horatii were Romans, and I tend to agree.

The kings asked the brothers to fight for their own cities with the sword. The winning side would rule over the other. The brothers agreed, and a time and place for the fight were set.

Before the fight, a formal treaty was established between the Romans and the Albans. They agreed that the nation whose champions won the fight would rule the other, but in peace. Different treaties have different terms but all was ratified in the same ceremonial manner. According to tradition, this process was traditional.

This is the earliest Roman treaty ever recorded. I'll describe how it was done, as was handed down by tradition:

King Tullus was asked by a fetial, "Do you command me, O King, to make a treaty with the Pater Patratus of the Alban people?" 

Tullus gave his approval.

The fetial then said, "O King, I request from you the sagmina \[sacred grass and herbs\]."

The king replied, "Take it free from impurities."

The fetials went to the Citadel and brought back glades of pure grass. The fetial then asked the king, "O King, do you make me the royal messenger of the Roman people, the Quirites, giving me the right to take with me my sacred vessels and attendants?"

King Tullus replied, "As long as it is done without deceit or harm to me and to the Roman people, the Quirites, I grant it."

The fetial was Marcus Valerius. He then appointed Spurius Fusius as the Pater Patratus for the Romans, touching his head and hair with the sacred verbena herb. The Pater Patratus was responsible for solemnizing the treaty and sealing it with an oath. This he did in a long traditional poem, too long to relate here, and the treaty was ratified.

The treaty terms were then recited. Fusius then said, "Listen, Jupiter! Listen, Pater Patratus of the Alban people! Listen, Alban people! As these words were recited from the wax tables today, clearly, without deception, and in their entirety, so shall the Roman people remain faithful to this treaty. But if the Roman people break this treaty first by a deliberate and dishonest council, then, O Jupiter, strike the Roman people as I now strike this pig, and strike them even harder with all your divine power."

After he said this, he hit the pig with piece of flint as a symbol. The Albans did the same and also performed their poems and took their oath of law with their own leader and priests.