**1.25** After the treaty was signed, the two sets of triplets, as agreed, prepared for battle. Their friends reminded them that their City, their gods, their parents, and their fellow countrymen, both at home and in the army, were watching them. Encouraged by these words, the brothers stepped into the middle between the two armies. The armies watched from their camps, free from immediate danger but unable to intervene. The fate of their nations depended on the bravery and luck of these few men. With tense anticipation, they focused their minds on what would become a very unpleasant spectacle.

The signal was given, and the triplets on each side charged at each other with fierce determination carrying the spirits of entire armies with them. Neither side cared about their own safety but only about the future of their City which they were now responsible for. At the first clashing sound of swords and shields the spectators watched in immense horror. When it was uncertain as to who was winning, the crowd became silent, holding their breath in suspense. Then in the hand-to-hand fighting, when the struggling bodies and sword thrusts still did not find a winner, it became a spectacle of wounds and blood. They watched as two of the Romans fell, one on top of the other, dying, but not before wounding all three of the Albans.

When they fell, the Alban army roared with cheers while the Roman legions felt defeated. However, their hope was not entirely lost as their remaining brother, Horatius, was still standing surrounded by the three Curiatii. Perhaps Horatius was unharmed, but he knew he couldn't fight all three Albans simultaneously. He was confident he could defeat them individually, however. So, he started to run, hoping to separate them, assuming they would follow at different speeds due to their injuries.

When he arrived some distance from where the fight had taken place, he looked back and saw they were following at great intervals as he had planned, and one was not far from him. He quickly turned and fiercely rushed at the closest Alban, killing him while the Alban army was calling out to the other two Curiatii to come to his aid. But the others were still too far away to help him. This time, it was the Romans who, surprised at this quick victory, roared with elation. Horatius, feeling victorious, immediately looked around for the second Curiatii. And before the last Curiatii could catch up, Horatius quickly killed the second Curiatii who had been injured.

At this point, there was one brother left on each side, but they weren't equal in strength or hope. Horatius was unharmed and had already won twice, while the last Alban, exhausted from his wounds and dragging his body to keep up, was demoralized by the deaths of his brothers. Nevertheless, he threw himself at Horatius. This wasn't a real fight, and Horatius knew it. He shouted, "I've killed two enemies so that the souls of my two brothers can rest. I'll kill a third so that Rome shall rule Alba, the prize of this fight." With this, he killed the remaining brother quickly, his sword plunging into the upper throat of the Curiatii who was struggling under the weight of his arms. He then looted the corpse where he lay, as was customary.

The Romans, cheering and congratulating, welcomed Horatius back in his victory, their joy all the greater since just a moment before they feared defeat. Both sides then buried their fallen brothers. The Romans were happy because they had won the war, while the Albans were sad because they had lost their independence. The tombs of the brothers can still be seen in the places where they fell. The two Romans are buried together closer to Alba Longa, and the three Albans are buried closer to Rome, each grave at an interval from the other, just like in their final battle with Horatius.