**1.28** The Alban army, who had been merely watching the battle happen the entire time, was then led down to the fields by Mettius Fufetius. He congratulated Tullus on his victory over the enemy, and Tullus responded with equal kindness, ordering the Albans to combine their camp with the Roman camp, hoping it would benefit both sides, and make preparations for a purification ceremony the next day.

When dawn came and everything for the ceremony was ready, Tullus ordered both armies to gather, as was the custom. Messengers started from the outskirts of camp, calling the Albans in first. The Albans, curious about the novelty of hearing the King address the soldiers, moved forward and stood near, eager to hear the Roman king speak.

As he began his speech, armed Romans immediately surrounded the Albans. It had all been planned in advance, and centurions were told to execute the operation as fast as they could. Tullus continued:

"Romans, if there was ever a time to be grateful, first to the immortal gods, then to your own bravery, it was after yesterday's battle. We weren't just fighting against enemies, but also against the treachery and betrayal of our allies, which is even more serious and dangerous."

"I want to clear up any misunderstandings. The Alban army moved to the mountains without my order. That was not my command but a deliberate act of deception, and a pretense of command. I wanted to keep you focused on the battle, unaware that you had been abandoned by our allies, and to scare the enemy into thinking they were being attacked at the rear, so they would retreat."

"Not all Albans are responsible for this, however. They were following their leader, just like you would have done if I had ordered you to move. Mettius Fufetius was the leader of that retreat, the instigator of this war, and the one who broke the treaty between Rome and Alba Longa. Let no one else dare to do such things. If anyone should resort to such treachery in the future, this will happen to them."

The armed centurions surrounded Fufetius.

"May what I do be good for the Roman people, for me, and for you, Albans," said Tullus, "I'm planning to move all the Alban people to Rome. I'll give your plebeians the rights of citizenship, and your leaders will join the Senate. We will become one City, one Republic. Just as the Alban state was once split from one people into two, it'll now become one again."

The young Alban men, unarmed and surrounded by armed soldiers, remained silent. Regardless of their feelings, they were united in their fear. Tullus continued:

"Mettius Fufetius, if you were capable of learning faithfulness and honoring treaties, I'd have taught you and spared your life. But since you can't change, your punishment will serve as a lesson to the human race to respect what you have violated. Just as you were torn between Fidenae and Rome, so now will your body be torn apart."

Two chariots, each pulled by four horses, were brought forward and Fufetius was tied down to them. The horses were then driven in opposite directions, tearing Fufetius apart instantly and carrying off his limbs still tied to the restraints.

Everyone turned away from the gruesome sight. This was the first and last time the Romans used a punishment that was so inhumane. In all other cases, however, they could proudly claim that no nation had ever adopted milder punishments.