**1.29** Meanwhile, the cavalry was sent ahead to Alba Longa to move the people to Rome. Then the Roman legions were sent in with orders to destroy the city.

When the cavalry arrived at the gates, there wasn't the usual chaos and fear that happens when a city is captured. There were no gates being broken down or walls shattered with a battering ram. The citadel wasn't being taken by force. There were no enemy shouts or the rush of armed men running through the city spreading destruction by sword and fire. Instead, there was a sorrowful silence and mute despair in every heart. Out of fear, they stood in their doorways asking each other what to do, unable to make a decision about what to take with them and what to leave behind. They wandered through their homes, memorizing each room, knowing it was the last time they would see them.

The cavalry started shouting for them to leave as the sounds of homes being pulled down on the outskirts of the city could be heard throughout. Dust from the farthest places filled the air like a cloud. People grabbed whatever they could and left, leaving behind their family gods, stores of provisions, and the homes they were born and raised in.

The roads were soon filled with a continuous stream of people leaving the city and seeing others in the same situation made them cry even more. The women cried out especially when they passed by the sacred temples, now filled with armed soldiers, seeing their sacred gods abandoned as if they were prisoners.

Once the Albans had left the city of Alba Longa, the Roman soldiers pulled down all the buildings, both public and private reducing everything to the ground. The city that had stood for four hundred years was reduced to a pile of rubble in just one hour. The only buildings spared were the temples of the gods, just as King Tullus had ordered.