**1.31** After the Sabines were defeated, the Romans' victory only added to the glory of King Tullus' rule as well as the entire Roman state, whose wealth, respect, and strength continued to grow.

However, strange news reached the King and senators at this time: stones were raining down on Mount Alba. This was difficult to believe, so Tullus sent people to check what was happening.

Upon arrival, they indeed saw a heavy shower of stones falling from the sky, almost like hailstones driven by the wind. They also thought they heard a loud voice from the grove at the top of the hill. The voice demanded that the Albans perform their forgotten religious rituals, which they had abandoned along with their homeland. By this time, the Albans had either adopted Roman gods or, possibly out of anger at their fate, stopped worshipping the Alban gods altogether.

As a result of this omen, the Romans instituted a nine-day ritual called a Novendiale. This could have been in response to the voice from Mount Alba, or, on the advice of the aruspices \[the priests who read and interpreted entrails\]. From then on, a nine-day festival was held whenever the same event was reported.

Not long after this happened, a plague spread among the people and made the soldiers too ill to serve. Despite their sickness, the warlike king didn't allow them to rest. He believed that the military life kept the body stronger and healthier than remaining at home.

Everything changed when King Tullus, too, became sick from the disease. The illness made him less fierce and more superstitious. Here was a man who had previously despised religious devotion as unworthy of a king suddenly becoming enslaved to every kind of superstition, both great and small. As a result, he filled the people's minds with all kinds of religious fears and the people ultimately followed along with their King. A general desire grew among the Romans to return to more peaceful times such as those under King Numa. The only way to heal their bodies, they believed, was to make peace with the gods and heaven.

It's said that, while reading Numa's commentaries, Tullus discovered a description of a certain secret sacrifice that had been made to Jupiter Elicio. He withdrew into private and tried to perform this ritual to Jupiter Elicio himself, except the ceremony hadn't been properly started or was carried out incorrectly. After he completed the ritual, he not only didn't receive a sign from heaven, but he provoked Jupiter's wrath with such a flawed ritual. He was immediately struck by lightning and his body burned along with his house.

King Tullus reigned for thirty-two years and was known primarily for the great glory of his military achievements.