**10.10** Meanwhile, as time was being wasted in a sluggish siege of Nequinum, two townspeople, whose homes were attached to the city wall, created a secret underground passage. Using this passage, they reached the Roman guards and were taken to Consul Fulvius, where they offered to let a group of armed soldiers into the city through the passage.

The Consul considered the offer carefully. He didn't want to reject it outright but also did not want to accept it without caution. One of the men was kept as a hostage while the other led two scouts through the secret passage. Once the spies confirmed the information, three hundred armed men, led by the townsman, entered the city.

They took control of the nearest gate during the night, breaking it open. The Consul and his army then entered the city without any resistance. This is how Nequinum came under the control of the Roman people.

A colony was sent there to act as a barrier against the Umbrians and the city was renamed Narnia, after the Nar River. The troops returned to Rome with a lot of spoils.

In that same year, the Etruscans were preparing for war, breaking their truce with Rome. However, a vast army of Gauls invaded their land, causing them to delay their plans. The Etruscans, relying on the wealth which had made them powerful, tried to turn the Gauls from enemies into allies. They had hoped to combine their armies to attack the Romans. The Gauls did not refuse the alliance; the question was about the payment. Once the price was agreed upon and paid, and everything was ready for the war, the Etruscans ordered the Gauls to join them to march against Rome.

The Gauls refused. They had agreed to a price, but it was payment for not ravaging Etruscan territory and attacking farmers with weapons. They said they would still be willing to go to war, if the Etruscans wished, but only if they were given a share of the Etruscan land and a permanent place to live.

Many meetings were held by the Etruscans to discuss this but they couldn't come to a decision. They weren't so much against giving up some of their land as they were afraid of having such a savage people living so close to them. So, the Gauls were sent away, taking with them a large amount of money that they had earned without any labor or danger. 

In addition to the Etruscan war, news of a possible uprising of the Gauls caused a lot of worry in Rome. They quickly agreed to a treaty with the Picentes without hesitation because of this.