**3.60** After settling the business in the City and firmly establishing the rights of the plebeians, the consuls left for their respective provinces.

Consul Valerius wisely postponed any immediate military actions against the combined forces of the Aequians and the Volscians at Algidum. Had he rushed into battle, the outcome might have been disastrous for the Romans, given the low morale after the inauspicious campaigns under the decemvirs. Valerius set up his camp a mile away from the enemy and kept his men under control.

The enemy then quickly filled the space between their two camps with an army, fully drawn up in battle formation, armed and ready for battle. When they challenged them to battle, the Romans didn't respond. Eventually, the Aequians and Volscians, bored and exhausted from standing and waiting in vain for the battle, believed it to be almost a victory. So, they left the area, some to plunder the Hernician territory and some to plunder the Latin territories, leaving a garrison in their camp with just enough men for defense but not enough for a full battle.

Seeing this, Valerius rallied his men and formed a battle line, now challenging the enemy to fight. The enemy declined, aware of their now reduced strength, to the delight of the Romans. Morale in the Roman camp grew as the Romans saw the enemy, now fearful behind their own palisades, as defeated. After a day of waiting in battle formation, the Romans yielded to the night and rested themselves, hopeful that there would be some kind of battle the next day. The enemy, on the other hand, was extremely anxious and sent messengers to recall their raiding parties. Some returned, but those who were too far away didn't.

When dawn broke, the Romans left their camp, ready to attack the enemy's rampart if a fight didn't occur. After much of the day passed without any movement, Consul Valerius ordered the standards to be raised, and they advanced. With the Roman battle line in motion coming toward them, the Aequians and the Volscians were furious that their victorious armies would now need to defend themselves with a rampart rather than their bravery and their weapons.

At their insistence, the Aequians and Volscians finally received a signal to attack from their generals. However, they couldn't assemble fully in time. Half of them had exited the gates, but the rest were filing out in order, trying to get to their positions. Valerius, with his army in place, and before the enemy's battle line could fully form and take up its strength, ordered the standards to be raised to signal the charge. The attack, delivered before the enemy were assembled and sufficiently arranged, revealed little more than a mob of confused men, hunting for their own units and directions. The Roman army's charge included shouting which added to the confusion and noise and violence. At the outset this caused the enemy to initially give ground. But then, when they gathered courage and their generals furiously rebuked them, asking whether they intended to flee in disgrace, they held their ground.