**3.61** On the other side of the battle, Consul Valerius told the Romans to remember that they fight as free men for the first time in defense of a free Rome. They were conquering for themselves and the spoils of their victory would not go to the decemvirs. The battle wasn't being led by Appius Claudius, but by Consul Valerius, a descendant of the liberators of the Roman people and a liberator, himself. He challenged them to prove that previous failures in battle were due to the failures of the generals as leaders, not the failures of soldiers. Let them show that it was disgraceful to show more courage in fighting against fellow citizens than against enemies, and to have been more fearful of slavery at home than abroad. No one's chastity had been in jeopardy except for Verginia's while at peace, and no citizen other than Appius Claudius had the power to pursue his dangerous lust. However, if the fortunes of war turned, the children of all would be in danger from so many thousands of the enemy. He didn't wish to imagine that either Jupiter or Mars, their father, would allow this to happen to the City founded under their auspices. He reminded them of the Aventine Hill and the Sacred Mount where freedom had been won just a few months before. Return the original, successful leaders there and demonstrate that the Roman soldiers still had the same abilities after the decemvirs were expelled as they had before. Let them show that the courage of the Roman people hadn't diminished after the laws were equalized.

After speaking to the infantry, Valerius then turned to the cavalry and cried, "Forward, young men! Show more bravery than the infantry, as you surpass them in honor and rank! At the first charge, the enemy was driven off by the infantry into the fields. Chase them and drive them out of the field with your cavalry. They won't withstand the attack and will hesitate rather than resist!"

The cavalry spurred their horses and charged toward the disordered enemy, already retreating from the infantry's attack. Breaking through their ranks, some rode to the enemy's rear line, while others, circling around the enemy in open space, turned many fleeing men away from the camp, frightening them as they rode past. The line of infantry, along with the consul himself and the full force of the battle, advanced toward the camp, which, after a great slaughter, was taken with even greater plunder.

News of the battle reached the City and was met with a public celebration. The news of the battle also reached the Sabines as well as Consul Horatius' army, inspiring the soldiers to compete for similar glory.

Consul Horatius had been training his army to do small skirmishes, helping them to rely on themselves and each other rather than dwelling on the shame they felt under the command of the decemvirs. These small battles had helped them to build their confidence and hope. The Sabines, proud from the success they had achieved the previous year, ceaselessly provoked and challenged them, asking why they were wasting time with these small, petty skirmishes like bandits, rushing out in small groups only to retreat again, rather than engaging in a significant battle. Why not engage the enemy in a full battle line and give fortune a chance to decide the matter once and for all?