**3.64** A solid victory by the tribunes and the plebeians nearly developed into an unhealthy, indulgent abuse of power. A conspiracy was hatched among the tribunes to secure their re-election. To make the scheme less obvious, the tribunes also planned to extend the term of the consuls, arguing that the senators were trying to undermine the rights of the tribunes by disrespecting the consuls. However, the tribunes worried about the potential consequences. What if the consuls, before the laws were firmly established, were to challenge the new tribunes? They noted that not all consuls would be like Horatius and Valerius, who both put the plebeians' freedom before their own interests.

By fortunate chance, Marcus Duillius, an ex-tribune who understood the longer-term implications, was chosen by lot to oversee the elections. Since he foresaw public anger overflowing because of the tribunes' continued term, he declared he would accept no votes for them. His colleagues protested. They argued that the tribes should be able to vote for whomever they wanted. If they couldn't do this, Duillius should resign his role overseeing elections so that his colleagues could conduct the voting in accordance with the law rather than following the desires of the patricians.

Since controversy had broken out, Duillius sent for the consuls. He asked them about their plans for the consular elections, and when they responded that they, themselves, would appoint new consuls, Duillius, having gained popular supporters for a proposal that was not at all popular, went before the assembly with them. The consuls were asked what they would do if the Roman people were to elect them as consuls again, considering their large contributions to the plebeians' liberty and military services. They didn't change their mind in the least.

Marcus Duillius praised the consuls for their steadfastness in not being like the decemvirs. He then held the election. Five tribunes were elected, but due to the aggressive campaigning of the nine tribunes, the other candidates couldn't secure enough tribal votes. Duillius dismissed the assembly and didn't hold a second one to fill the missing places. He declared himself satisfied with the law, which, although the number of tribunes was nowhere specified, only stated that the office of tribunes shouldn't be left vacant, and that the elected tribunes should be allowed to co-opt colleagues. He recited the formal language of the law which said:

"If I propose to you ten plebeian tribunes and if you appoint fewer than ten plebeian tribunes today, then let those whom these elected tribunes co-opt as colleagues be, by this same law, legitimate plebeian tribunes under the same law, just as those whom you elect today as plebeian tribunes."

Duillius' colleagues tried to promote having more than ten tribunes, but he insisted that the Republic couldn't have fifteen tribunes. Then, having persevered until the end and thwarting his colleagues' ambitions of having fifteen tribunes, he resigned his office. This act earned the approval of both the patricians and the plebeians.