**2.52** With the return of peace, the City saw an increase in grain brought in from Campania. As fears of future famine subsided, the grain that had been hoarded was released. With abundance, plenty of time for leisure, and no external threats to complain about, the plebeians searched for problems at home. The plebeian tribunes, as usual, began to stir them up with their poison, pushing for an Agrarian Law and inciting them against any patricians who opposed it.

This opposition wasn't just against the senators as a whole, but also against specific people. Quintus Considius and Titus Genucius, the sponsors of the Agrarian Law, set a trial date for Titus Menenius, charging him with the loss of the garrison at the Cremera Fort. This attack had occurred while he was consul and, despite his camp not being far away, he didn't offer assistance. The charge was overcome, since the senators made great efforts to defend him, as they had done for Coriolanus, and because of the lingering popularity of his father, Agrippa. The plebeian tribunes, however, imposed a fine of two-thousand pounds of aes rude upon him, even though they had accused him of a capital offense. He paid it himself. The penalty affected him deeply. It's said that he could not bear the disgrace and mental anguish, and that he died by illness as a result.

At the beginning of the year, new consuls were elected, Gaius Nautius Rutilus and Publius Valerius Publicola.

The former consul, Spurius Servilius, was indicted by the tribunes Lucius Caedicius and Titus Statius, just as he left office. Unlike Menenius, Servilius didn't rely on personal pleas for mercy or the intercession of the Senate, but instead faced them with total confidence in his innocence and his popularity. He was charged with the battle against the Etruscans at the Janiculum. However, he was just as bold defending himself as he was with defending the state. In a fiery speech, he reprimanded both the tribunes and the plebeians, then condemned them for the trial and death of Titus Menenius, whose father had previously helped the plebeians regain the very rights that they now enjoyed. His colleague Verginius was brought forward as a witness to support him, however, it was the condemnation of Menenius that helped him the most, as popular opinion on the matter had changed.
