**3.70** In the Roman army, the two consuls had equal power. However, Consul Furius willingly gave up his supreme command to Consul Quinctius. This was beneficial in handling important matters, as Consul Quinctius responded with respect to Consul Furius' humility. He shared all his plans and honors with Furius, treating him as an equal even though he was no longer one.

In the battle line, Quinctius led the right wing and Furius the left wing. The central line was given to Spurius Postumius Albus, the legate. Publius Sulpicius, the other legate, was put in charge of the cavalry. The infantry on the right wing fought extremely well, resisting the Volscians with great bravery.

Publius Sulpicius broke through the enemy's center with the cavalry. Although he could have returned back the same way before the enemy reformed their disrupted ranks, he decided it was better to attack the enemy from the rear. Acting quickly, by charging into their rear, he would have scattered them in a complete panic. However, the Volscian and Aequian cavalry intercepted them and engaged them in battle, thus keeping Sulpicius from moving forward.

Sulpicius shouted to his men that there was no time to delay; they were surrounded and cut off from the Roman infantry unless the cavalry fought with all their strength. It wasn't enough merely to drive away the enemy's cavalry; they must finish off both the horses and the men so that neither could return to the battle and fight again. He pointed out that their densely packed enemy infantry had given way to the Roman's cavalry and wouldn't be able to put up any resistance. This did not fall on deaf ears. With a single charge, they routed the entire enemy cavalry, threw many men from their horses, and stabbed the men and their horses with javelins. This ended the battle with the cavalry.

Sulpicius' cavalry then attacked the enemy's infantry line, sending messengers to report their success to the consuls including where the enemy line was already faltering. The news rallied the Romans and frightened the Aequians who were beginning to retreat. It was in the center that the Aequians began to lose, as the cavalry broke their ranks. Then, at that point, the left wing began to be driven back under Consul Quinctius' leadership.

The right wing was the most challenging. Consul Agrippa Furius, youthful, energetic, and courageous, felt that every part of the battle was going better than his. He seized the standards from the standard-bearers and began to carry them himself. And advancing, he began to hurl them into the crowded ranks of the enemy. The Roman soldiers, fearing disgrace, attacked the enemy, and victory was achieved on all fronts.

At that time, Consul Quinctius sent a messenger to Consul Furius to report that he was victorious and was ready to storm the enemy's camp. He didn't want to do it until he knew that Consul Furius had also won on the left wing; he wanted him to bring his standards and his men with him so that the entire army could claim the spoils at once. Accordingly, Furius, with mutual congratulations, joined his victorious colleague at the front of the enemy's camp. Both consuls easily defeated the few defenders and took the fortifications without a struggle. They returned with a vast amount of spoils, including their own possessions that had been lost during the devastation of the fields.

It's unclear whether Consul Quinctius and Consul Furius asked for a Triumph or if the Senate awarded them one. There is no reason given for this honor being overlooked or not expected. It's possible that after such a long time ago a Triumph was denied to Consul Horatius and Consul Valerius, who had ended the Sabine war successfully in addition to defeating the Aequians and Volscians, the consuls were too embarrassed to ask for a Triumph for only half of their services. The consuls may have feared that if they did receive it, it would seem to be based on favoritism rather than merit.