**3.72** The consuls were shocked when they realized that Scaptius wasn't only being heard in silence but also with approval. A terrible and shameful act was taking place with both gods and men as witnesses. They called for the leaders of the Senate and together they approached the various tribes, urging them to not commit a terrible crime by turning the judges' proceedings into a dispute for their own personal gain. Even if a judge could legally protect his own property, no amount of land acquired could compensate for the harm done by alienating their allies through unfairness. The damage to their reputation and the loss of trust would be far more significant, almost incalculable.

To have this reported by ambassadors, to have it publicized, to have allies hear it, and enemies too, what sadness it would give allies! What joy it would give enemies! Would neighboring states blame this action on Scaptius, a notorious elderly rabble-rouser at meetings? It would make Scaptius famous enough to have it inscribed below his portrait, but it would paint the Roman plebeians as swindlers and thieves of others' property. Would any judge in a private case ever behave this way, awarding himself the disputed property? We doubt that Scaptius himself would do such a thing, despite his apparent lack of shame.

The consuls and the senators cried out these things, but Scaptius' greed and the influence of that greed were more powerful. The tribes, having been called, judged that the disputed land was the public property of the Roman plebeians.

It isn't disputed that the verdict would have been the same if they had sought other judges. However, the excellence of the cause didn't, not even a little, justify or make the disgrace of the judgment forgivable. This was seen as more disgraceful and harsher to the Roman senators than to the Aricians and Ardeans.

The rest of the year passed without any City or foreign disturbances.