**4.44** The election of consular tribunes was done first. The elected consular tribunes were all patricians and included Lucius Quinctius Cincinnatus for the third time, Lucius Furius Medullinus for the second time, Marcus Manlius, and Aulus Sempronius Atratinus.

Sempronius presided over the election of quaestors. Among the plebeian candidates were a son of Aulus Antistius, a plebeian tribune, and a brother of Sextus Pompilius, another plebeian tribune. Yet, despite the power and support of these plebeian tribunes, they couldn't prevent the people from preferring candidates from patrician families, whose fathers and grandfathers they had seen serving as consuls.

All the plebeian tribunes were angered, especially Sextus Pompilius and Aulus Antistius, who were upset about the rejection of their relatives. What on earth was the matter? Despite their own services, the patricians' mistreatment, and the desire to exercise their new rights, when they were finally allowed to run for office, no one from the plebeians was elected, not as a consular tribune and not even as a quaestor! Not even the pleas of a father for his son or a brother for his brother, or the authority of the plebeian tribunes, whose sacrosanct power was created for the support of their liberty, had any effect.

Clearly, there was fraud involved. They accused Consular Tribune Aulus Sempronius of dishonesty, claiming that he used more trickery than fairness in the elections. They complained that their own candidates had been unfairly defeated for office. Unable to attack Sempronius directly as he was protected by his innocence and his current official position as magistrate, the plebeian tribunes directed their anger toward Gaius Sempronius, his cousin, and with the help of their colleague, Marcus Canuleius, they brought a charge against him for the disgrace of the previous failed war against the Volscians. As the same plebeian tribunes frequently brought up the issue of the Agrarian Law in the Senate, they knew that Gaius Sempronius had always strongly opposed the proposal. If Sempronius abandoned the matter, they thought, he would lose favor among the patricians, or if he persisted, he would offend the plebeians.

Sempronius stood firm in his belief, risking unpopularity and damage to his own case, rather than fail the Republic. He refused to allow a land grant to win favor with the three plebeian tribunes. They were not seeking land for the plebeians but were trying to discredit him and he was prepared to face the backlash with courage. Nor should he, a citizen or anyone else, be so indebted to the Senate that sparing one person would cause public harm.

On the day of the trial, he chose to defend himself with an unbroken spirit but was ultimately fined fifteen-thousand pounds of aes rude despite the patricians' attempts to persuade the plebeians to be lenient.

That same year, Postumia, a Vestal Virgin, was tried for incest. She was innocent, but her overly pretty dress, charming manners, and the free-spirited way she behaved was unbefitting a virgin and had raised suspicions. The case was initially postponed, but she was later acquitted. The Pontifex Maximus, under the guidance of the college, instructed her to stop the dirty jokes and to act like a solemn Vestal instead of a flirt.

Also, that same year, the city of Cumae, which was then occupied by the Greeks, was captured by the Campanians.