**3.10** Consul Lucretius came back with a lot of spoils but even more glory. He then increased his fame by showing off all the spoils in the Campus Martius for three days so that every citizen could identify and take their belongings. The rest, for which there was no owner, was sold.

Everyone agreed that the Consul deserved a Triumph, but it was delayed because of the law the tribune was advocating; dealing with this law seemed more important to Lucretius. The issue was debated for several days in the Senate and among the plebeians. Finally, the tribune gave in to Lucretius and stopped pushing. Then Lucretius and his army were honored with a Triumph, celebrating his victory over the Volscians and Aequians. His troops followed him in the Triumph. The other consul, Veturius, was allowed to enter Rome in an ovation on horseback without his soldiers.

The next year, the Terentillian Law was brought up again. This time, it was brought up by the entire college of tribunes and targeted the new consuls, Publius Volumnius Amintinus and Servius Sulpicius Camerinus.

There were signs of trouble during this year. The sky seemed to be on fire and there was a big earthquake. People believed that an ox had spoken, a thing which had not been believed the previous year. Among other reported prodigies was a rain of flesh that a vast number of hungry birds intercepted mid-air as they flew around. The flesh that remained scattered on the ground stayed for several days without smelling bad.

In response, the Sibylline Books were consulted by religious magistrates, the duumviri sacrorum. The predictions given to them were that there would be danger from a gathering of strangers, an attempt on the highest places of Rome, and subsequent massacres from there. It was a warning, they said. All sedition must stop.

The tribunes claimed that these frivolous issues were being prioritized in order to block the Terentillian Law, and that a major fight was imminent.

And behold, as if the same thing should repeat each year, a report then came in from the Hernician allies that the Volscians and Aequians, despite having sustained heavy losses, were rebuilding their armies. The Hernicians said that Antium was the center of support for these armies. The people of Antium were openly holding meetings at Ecetra and this, they believed, was the source and strength of the war. When the Senate heard this, they ordered a draft and told the consuls to divide the war management between them. One would handle the Volscians and the other the Aequians.

The tribunes protested in the Forum arguing that the Volscian war was a sham and the Hernicians were just playing along. The Romans' freedom was being undermined not by force, but by trickery. New enemies were being invented because it was highly unlikely that the Volscians and Aequians, having been very close to being entirely wiped out, could start a war on their own. The consuls were defaming a loyal colony near Rome and were declaring war on the innocent people of Antium. Instead, the real war was against the plebeians of Rome, now being loaded up with weapons and ushered hurriedly out of the City in a reckless march. This was a way for the Senate to get back at the tribunes by exile and banishment, defeating the Terentillian Law. However, while they still could, while they were still at home and in their togas, the plebeians should take care not to be driven from the City or be subject to the yoke of submission by a draft. If they had the will, help wouldn't be lacking. All the tribunes agreed. There was no external threat, no danger from abroad. The gods had made sure the previous year that their freedom could now be defended safely. All of these arguments were said by the tribunes.