**3.13** Over and above the general dislike for Caeso, one accusation against him was particularly damning. Marcus Volscius Fictor, who had been a tribune several years prior, stepped forward as a witness. He claimed that shortly after the plague had hit Rome, he encountered a gang of young men who had been prowling the streets of the Subura neighborhood. A fight broke out, and his older brother, still recovering from illness, was knocked down by a punch from Caeso. Half dead, he was carried home in his arms, and Volscius believed that his brother died from that punch. He also claimed that previous consuls hadn't allowed him to pursue the matter.

As Volscius made these accusations loudly, the men hearing the story became so irritated and outraged that Caeso was almost killed by the mob. Then Tribune Verginius ordered him to be arrested and taken to jail. The patricians resisted with force. Titus Quinctius, who had come to his defense earlier, argued that a person who was scheduled for a capital offense trial shouldn't be punished before the trial and without a conviction. Verginius responded that he wouldn't punish him before conviction, but he would keep him in jail until the trial date. This would give the Roman people a chance to punish a homicide if found guilty.

The tribunes were appealed to, but they protected their power by taking a middle ground. They prohibited Caeso from being jailed but expressed their desire for the accused to appear at his trial. The tribunes also wanted a sum of money to be promised to the plebeians if Caeso didn't show up. The amount of money to be promised was debated and referred to the Senate. Caeso was held in the public assembly until the patricians could be consulted. It was decided that he should give a surety bond. One surety was set at three-thousand pounds aes rude. The number of sureties to be given was left to the tribunes, who set the limit at ten. The prosecutor released the accused for ten sureties, or approximately thirty-thousand pounds aes rude. This was the first time that public sureties were provided for a state trial.

After being released from the Forum, Caeso fled from Rome and went into exile among the Etruscans the following night. When it was pleaded at the trial that he had left his home to go into exile, Tribune Verginius nevertheless still tried to hold the trial, but his colleagues, when appealed to, stopped the trial and dismissed the assembly. The fine was cruelly exacted from Caeso's father, Cincinnatus, however. After selling all his possessions to pay for it, Cincinnatus lived for a long time in a secluded hut on the other side of the Tiber River, as if in exile.