**3.14** This trial and the proposal of the Terentillian Law kept the state busy. However, there was peace from foreign threats.

The patricians were silenced by the exile of Caeso, whereas the tribunes, feeling victorious, thought that the Terentillian Law was as good as passed. As far as the older patricians were concerned, they had given up their part in governing the state. The younger patricians, especially those close to Caeso, were more bitter than ever against the plebeians, but they hadn't lost their spirit. Yet, they promoted their cause by dampening their fury with a kind of moderation.

When the Terentillian Law was first proposed after Caeso's exile, the young patricians were organized and ready. They came prepared with a large army of clients, who attacked the tribunes whenever the tribunes tried to remove them from the Forum. No single person stood out for praise or blame. The plebeians complained that a thousand Caesos had now replaced the one.

On the days when the tribunes didn't push for the Terentillian Law, though, these same young patricians were calm and peaceful. They greeted the plebeians politely, engaged in conversation, and invited them into their homes. They went to the Forum and let the tribunes hold their meetings without interrupting them. They were never rude to anyone, either in public or private, unless the Terentillian Law was being discussed. So, at all other times, the young patricians were well-liked. As such, the tribunes conducted all their other business without disruption. They were even re-elected for the next year without any offensive remarks or violence. By calming and managing the plebeians, the patricians gradually made them more cooperative. Using these methods, the patricians managed to avoid the Terentillian Law for the entire year.