**1.20** King Numa then focused on appointing priests. He conducted many holy rituals himself, particularly those rituals now associated with the flamen Diales or high priest of Diales. However, he knew that, in a warrior society, there would be more warrior kings like Romulus than kings like Numa who were willing to do holy rituals.

So, he assigned a permanent flamen or priest to Jupiter to ensure the royal religious duties weren't ignored. He gave this priest a special robe and a curule chair, symbols of royal authority. He also appointed two more flamines, one for Mars, the god of war, and another for Quirinus, the deified Romulus.

He chose virgins for the priesthood of Vesta, a tradition that came from Alba Longa and was connected to the city Romulus had come from. He gave the priestesses salaries from the public treasury to ensure they were always present in the temple. Then, he ensured they were viewed as sacred and respected by requiring them to remain virgins and follow other religious practices.

Numa picked twelve young noblemen priests \[salii\] for Mars Gradivus and gave them a decorated tunic and a bronze breastplate. These priests would carry heavenly shields called ancilia, and they would move around the City singing ritual hymns and performing a solemn religious dance.

He then selected as pontiff Numa Marcius, son of Marcus, from among the senators, giving him a complete set of written and sealed religious rituals. These instructions detailed which sacrifices to make, when and which temples to perform the holy rituals, and from which funds to draw the money for these expenses. Then, he put all public and private religious practices under the pontiff's supervision. This was to ensure there was a place for the plebeians to seek religious advice, should there be any confusion in the religious laws. This also ensured that ancestral rites would be followed and to prevent adopting foreign ones.

The same pontiff, Numa decreed, should teach the people not only about heavenly ceremonies but also about funeral rites and how to soothe the spirits of the dead. The pontiff was to explain which signs sent by lightning or any other event should be heeded and atoned for.

To gain such knowledge from the minds of the gods, he dedicated an altar on the Aventine to Jupiter Elicius and consulted the god through omens about which signs should be atoned for.