**10.17** While the Samnites were boasting about this and attempting to plot war with Etruscan help, the Roman army, busy in the Samnite territory, were getting irritated.

Publius Decius, upon learning from his scouts about the complete departure of the Samnite army from their territory, called together a council:

"Why are we wandering through the countryside, waging war from village to village?" he asked, "Why not attack the cities and fortified areas? There is no army guarding Samnium now. They have abandoned their city and have chosen to go into exile." 

Decius' proposal was widely accepted. He led an attack on Murgantia, a city of significant strength. The soldiers' enthusiasm, fueled by their loyalty to their leader and the prospect of greater riches than could be found in the rural areas, was so high that they captured the city in a single day by force. There, two thousand Samnites and a hundred others who fought were surrounded and captured, plus an immense amount of booty was seized.

Decius, did not want the troops to be burdened with heavy baggage during their march, so he gathered them together and spoke:

"Do you want to be content with this single victory and this loot? Or do you want to have hopes that match your courage? All the cities of the Samnites, as well as the property left in them, are yours. After repeatedly defeating their legions, you have finally driven them out of the country. Sell the items you have. Entice merchants, with the promise of profit, to follow you on your march, ready to buy more. I'll periodically provide you with goods to sell. Let's move on to the city of Romulea, where less work, but more reward awaits you."

After selling the loot, they, themselves, urged the commander to march on Romulea. There, too, without any preparation or siege engines, as soon as the standards arrived, the soldiers, undeterred by any resistance, quickly placed the ladders wherever was most convenient for each of them and climbed the walls. The town was captured and looted. About two thousand three hundred men were killed and six thousand people were captured. The soldiers obtained an immense amount of loot. They were required to sell this in the same way as before; and, although they weren't allowed any rest, they moved on to Ferentinum with great enthusiasm.

But here they encountered more difficulty and danger. The city was fiercely defended, and the place was strongly defended by both nature and fortifications. However, the soldiers, now accustomed to looting, overcame every obstacle. About three thousand of the enemy were killed around the walls, and the loot was given to the troops.

In some records, the main credit for capturing these cities is given to Fabius Maximus. They say that Murgantia was captured by Decius, while Romulea and Ferentinum was taken by Fabius. Some attribute this honor to the new consuls: others claim not to both, but to one of them, Lucius Volumnius, since the province of Samnium had fallen to him.