**10.14** The new consuls, Quintus Fabius Maximus for the fourth time, and Publius Decius Mus for the third time, planned between themselves as to which of them should take the Samnites and which should take the Etruscans. They had been determining the number of troops needed for each province and who would be the more suitable commander for each war when ambassadors from Sutrium, Nepete, and Falerii arrived reporting that the council leaders of the Etruscan states were considering suing for peace. The consuls immediately ended their planning and directed all their military efforts toward Samnium.

To ensure a steady supply of provisions and to keep the enemy guessing about where the war would be waged, the consuls set out on separate routes to Samnium. Fabius led his legions through Sora's territory, while Decius led his legions through Sidicini's territory. Upon reaching enemy borders, they each led their forces in a widespread formation, plundering as they went. 

They scouted widely and noticed that the enemy was gathered in a hidden valley near Tifernum, ready to attack from higher ground when the Romans entered. Fabius sent the baggage to a safe place, placing a small garrison there to protect it, and told the soldiers that a battle was imminent. He then led his troops in a tight, square formation to the enemy's hiding place. The Samnites, unable to launch a surprise attack, decided to engage in a pitched battle. They marched out into the open field, relying more on their courage than their hopes, and left their fate to chance.

Despite the odds, the Samnites, whether it was because they had gathered their forces from all the Samnite peoples, or because they thought their very existence as a nation depended on this battle, succeeded in alarming Roman ranks and putting up a strong fight.

Fabius, seeing that the enemy was holding their ground, called over his son Quintus Fabius Maximus Gurges and Marcus Valerius, who were military tribunes with whom he had advanced to the front line, and ordered them to go to the cavalry and tell them, if ever the Roman Republic had been aided by cavalry before, they should strive today to maintain the glory of its order as unconquered. The infantry's efforts, the Consul said, weren't enough to break the enemy's line. Their only hope was in the shock of the cavalry's charge. He personally addressed the young men by name, treating each with equal courtesy, overwhelming them with praises and promising rewards.

Since it was conceivable that the cavalry charge might fail, Fabius also had a backup plan. He ordered Scipio, his legate, to withdraw the hastati of the first legion from the battle and, as secretly as he could, lead them by a roundabout route to the nearest mountains. Then, by a climb hidden from view, they were to move the column up into the hills, and when the enemy's back was turned, launch a surprise attack on the Samnite's rear.

Meanwhile, the cavalry, led by the two young military tribunes, charged forward before the standards and their sudden appearance caused almost as much confusion among their own men as among the enemy. The Samnite line stood firm against the cavalry's galloping onslaught and couldn't be driven back or broken through on any side. Since the attempt had been in vain, the cavalry retreated behind the standards and withdrew from the battle.

From this, the Samnites grew more courageous. The Roman front could not have sustained the prolonged contest, as they were met by a resistance which was becoming more stubborn as its confidence rose, had not the consul ordered the second line to relieve the first. These fresh troops halted the Samnites, who were now charging forward.

Just then, Roman standards appeared on the hills, along with a fearsome shout from the ranks. The Samnites were overwhelmingly alarmed, though it was a mistake for them to be so concerned. Consul Fabius cried out that Consul Decius was approaching. The soldiers, wild with joy, shouted that the other consul was coming with his legions.

The Samnites' mistake worked in the Romans' favor. The Samnites, now exhausted, began to panic since they were afraid that they would be overwhelmed by a fresh, uninjured army. They fled, scattering in all directions, and fewer of them were killed than expected from such a great victory.

The Romans killed three thousand four hundred Samnites, and about eight hundred and thirty were taken prisoner. They also captured twenty-three military standards.