**10.19** As the consuls were departing, the legates and tribunes of Appius's army gathered around them. Some pleaded with their own general, Appius, not to refuse the help voluntarily offered by his colleague, which should have been sought from the start. Many stopped Volumnius as he was leaving, protesting that he shouldn't abandon the Republic's interests due to a personal rivalry with his colleague. They warned him that if anything went wrong, the deserter would be blamed not the deserted; success or failure in the Etruscan territory, honorable or disgraceful, would be attributed to Lucius Volumnius. No one would inquire what words Appius had spoken, they would inquire what the fate of the army was. Though Appius was dismissing him, they argued that the Republic and the army needed him to stay and urged him to gauge the soldiers' feelings.

With such pleas and warnings, they practically dragged the resistant consuls to an assembly. There, lengthy speeches were made, with the same effect as those previously made in front of a smaller audience. Volumnius, who had the stronger argument, proved himself a capable speaker, despite his colleague's exceptional eloquence.

Appius sarcastically remarked that he should be credited for making Volumnius, once mute and tongue-tied, into a consul who could now speak well. In the previous consulship, certainly in the first months, he had not been able to utter a word, but now he was already making populist speeches. Volumnius responded, "I would rather you had learned from me how to act courageously instead of me learning from you how to speak eloquently."

Volumnius proposed that the decision should not be based on who was the better speaker, as the Republic didn't ask for that, but who was the better commander. He suggested that they choose between the Etruscan territory and Samnium, and invited Appius to choose first whichever he preferred, and he would handle the affairs in the other.

The soldiers loudly demanded that they jointly conduct the war in Etruscan territory. Volumnius, realizing this was the general wish, said, "Since I made a mistake in interpreting my colleague's intentions, I will make sure there was no misunderstanding about your wishes. Signify with a shout if you want me to stay or go."

The resulting shout was so loud that it drew the enemy out of their camp, grabbing their weapons and descending into battle.

Volumnius also ordered the signal for battle and the standards to be brought up to the camp. It's said that Appius hesitated, knowing that regardless of whether he fought or remained idle, Volumnius would be victorious. Eventually, fearing that his own legions would follow Volumnius, he also gave the signal for battle at his men's insistence.

Neither side was well-prepared for battle. The Samnite general, Gellius Egnatius, had left with a few cohorts to go foraging, and his men entered the fight impulsively rather than from any direction or command of anyone. The Roman armies didn't march out together and didn't have enough time to form properly. Volumnius began to fight before Appius reached the enemy, resulting in an uneven front line. By a reversal of fate, the Etruscans, accustomed to facing Samnites, now fought against Volumnius, while the Samnites, after some delay due to their general's absence, ended up fighting against Appius. 

It is said that during the heat of the battle, Appius, so that he might be seen standing among the foremost standards, raised his hands to heaven and prayed, "Bellona, ​​if you give us victory today, I will build a temple to you." Having prayed this, it was as if the goddess were prompting him, and he matched the courage of his colleague, and the troops matched the courage of the commander. Both leaders fulfilled their duties as generals, and their armies fought with determination, each hoping to be the first to achieve victory.

Thus they routed and scattered the enemy, who weren't used to such overwhelming numbers, as they were used to fighting hand-to-hand. The Romans continued to pursue the them, driving them into their camp. There, with the intervention of Gellius and his Sabellian cohorts, the battle heated up for a short time. When this fighting dispersed, the camp was attacked by the victors.

While Volumnius led standards to the camp gates, Appius, repeatedly invoking Bellona the Victorious to inspire his soldiers, they forcefully broke in over the ramparts and through the trenches. The camp was captured and looted, and an immense amount of spoils was taken and then given to the soldiers. Seven thousand eight hundred of the enemy were killed, and two thousand one hundred and twenty were captured.