**10.21** This raid on the Campanian countryside sparked significant alarm in Rome. Around the same time, news arrived that the Etruscan army had taken up arms following the departure of Volumnius' army. Gellius Egnatius, the Samnite leader, was rallying the Umbrians to join the rebellion and enticing the Gauls with lucrative offers. 

This news terrified the Senate. They ordered a cessation of business, then called for a draft of men from all walks of life. Not only were free-born men and youths required to enlist, but older men were also formed into cohorts, and the freedmen were incorporated into the centuries. The city's defense plans were drawn up, and the praetor, Publius Sempronius, was given the primary command.

However, letters from Consul Volumnius relieved the Senate of their worry. In them, Volumnius said that the enemy that had devastated Campania had been defeated and routed. Immediately, the Senate declared a public thanksgiving for the consul's successful campaign. The cessation of business which had lasted eighteen days was lifted, and the thanksgiving was celebrated with great joy.

Next, they considered how to protect the region laid waste by the Samnites, resolving to provide two colonies would be established on the borders of the Vescinian and Falernian territories. One would be at the mouth of the Liris river, named Minturnae, and the other would be in the Vescinian Forest, bordering the Falernian territory. This location was said to be the site of Sinope, a Greek city, which had been renamed Sinuessa by the Roman colonists.

The plebeian tribunes were tasked with obtaining a plebiscite \[an order from the plebeians\], directing Publius Sempronius, the praetor, to appoint three triumviri to oversee the colonization efforts. However, people were hesitant to volunteer, as they felt they were being sent to a perpetual garrison in a hostile region, and not to fertile fields.

The Senate's attention was soon diverted by the worsening war in Etruria, with repeated letters from Appius Claudius urging them not to ignore the growing unrest in that region. He reported that four major nations, the Etruscans, the Samnites, the Umbrians, and the Gauls, were now joining forces. Their armies had become so large that they had to establish two separate camps, since a single location could not contain such a large amount of people.

Given these grave developments, and with the time for elections approaching, the Senate recalled Consul Volumnius to Rome to conduct the vote. But before calling the centuries to a vote, Volumnius addressed the people in an assembly. The scale of the Etruscan war was immense, he said, as even when he and his colleague had fought there previously, the war had already been too large for a single general or army to handle. Since that time, the situation had worsened by adding the Umbrians and a massive force of Gauls.

On this day, he told the people, they would be electing consuls to face not one but four enemy nations as generals. If he had not been certain that the man chosen as consul would be unquestionably the greatest general of the time, he would have immediately proposed appointing a dictator instead.