**10.24** Quintus Fabius then entered his fifth term as consul, and Publius Decius his fourth. They had served together three times as consuls and once as censors and they were known not only for their impressive military accomplishments, but also for their unity in governing. 

This year, their unity was disrupted, not by themselves, but by a disagreement between the patricians and plebeians. The patricians wanted Fabius to govern the Etruscan territory without drawing lots, while the plebeians insisted that Decius should settle the matter in the usual way: by lot. A dispute broke out in the Senate, and, since Fabius had more support there, the issue was brought before the people.

The debate was brief among these military men who valued actions over words. Fabius argued that it was unfair for him to lay the groundwork in the Etruscan territory only for someone else to reap the benefits. He compared it to someone harvesting fruit; if a man plants a tree, should he not be able to gather the fruit from it? It was he who had opened the Ciminian Forest and made a road through the winding groves for the Roman forces in previously inaccessible areas. Why they had disturbed him at this stage of his life to be consul if they intended to give the war's management to someone else?

He then took a more reproachful tone. It was clear that he had been chosen as a rival rather than a partner in command, and Decius, it seemed, had begrudged the three consulships which they shared in harmony. If they thought him capable of commanding in the province, they should send him there. Regardless, he would be at the discretion of the Senate and would obey the people.

Publius Decius, on the other hand, accused the Senate of injustice. The patricians, he claimed, had tried to keep the plebeians from reaching higher offices for as long as possible. Now that merit had proven to be a powerful force, it shouldn't be dishonored in any class of men. How had not only the votes of the people but also the decisions of fate been cancelled to benefit a select few? He pointed out that all previous consuls were assigned provinces by lots, but now the Senate was giving a province to Fabius without lots. If this was intended as an honor, then Fabius had earned so much from him and from the Republic that he would gladly welcome the glory of Quintus Fabius, though that glory now seemed to shine at the cost of Decius' own disgrace. Who can doubt, when there is one war that's harsh and difficult and it is entrusted to one of them by lot, that the other consul would be considered superfluous and useless?

Let Fabius boast of what he had achieved in the Etruscan war; Publius Decius wanted to boast as well. Perhaps he might be able to completely extinguish the fire that Fabius had left smoldering, which often reignited in sudden bursts. He was willing to concede honors and rewards to Fabius out of respect for his age and majesty, but he would not back down when faced with danger or a tough fight with an enemy. If he learned nothing else from this contest, he said, he had learned this: what belongs to the people, the people should command. The Senate should not reward their favorites.

He prayed to Jupiter Optimus Maximus and all the immortal gods, that they would grant him and his colleague an equal lot, provided that they also grant the same ability and success in conducting the war.  Surely this was naturally fair and useful, and belonged to the reputation of the Roman people, that the consuls should be men who could each, individually, be trusted to lead the Etruscan war successfully.

Fabius asked the Roman people that, if nothing else, they listen to the letters of the praetor Appius Claudius which were sent from the Etruscan territory before the tribes were called inside to vote. He then left the Comitium. With the unanimous support of both the people and the Senate, Fabius was granted the province of the Etruscan territory without drawing lots.