**4.30** In the City, the plebeian tribunes tried to get consular tribunes elected, but they were unsuccessful. Lucius Papirius Crassus and Lucius Julius Iullus were elected as consuls.

The Aequians' ambassadors asked the Senate for a treaty but the Senate suggested that they surrender, instead of a treaty. However, they asked and secured a truce for eight years.

The Volscians were dealing with internal problems and sedition due to a stubborn disagreement between those advocating for peace and those advocating for war. This was on top of the disaster they had suffered at Algidum.

The Romans, meanwhile, were enjoying peace on all fronts. The consuls secretly learned from a plebeian tribune that a popular law about the assessment of fines was about to be proposed by plebeian tribunes. Instead, the consuls decided to propose it, themselves.

The next new consuls were Lucius Sergius Fidenas, serving for the second time, and Hostius Lucretius Tricipitinus.

Nothing noteworthy happened during their consulate.

Next year, the consuls who succeeded them were Aulus Cornelius Cossus and Titus Quinctius Poenus, who was serving for the second time.

The Veientes started making raids into Roman territory. There were rumors that some young men from Fidenae had been involved in these raids. Lucius Sergius, Quintus Servilius, and Mamercus Aemilius were tasked with investigating into the matter. Some of the suspects were exiled to Ostia because they did not have a good excuse for why they had been absent from Fidenae during those raids. New colonists were brought in, and the land of those who had died in the war was given to them.

That year, there was a severe drought. Not only was there a lack of rain, but the earth was also devoid of its natural moisture, barely allowing rivers to flow. In some places, the lack of water led to piles of cattle dying of thirst around dried-up springs and streams. Other cattle were sickened by scabies, a skin disease, which then spread to humans, first affecting farmers and slaves. Soon, the City was filled with sick people.

Not only were people physically affected, but their minds were also taken over by a horde of various superstitions, most of them foreign. Strangers, claiming to be soothsayers, profited from these superstitions by introducing new ways of sacrificing in their homes and captivating the peoples' minds. Eventually, the city's leaders, shamed by the sight of unfamiliar religious ceremonies being performed in the streets and chapels to appease the gods, ordered the aediles to ensure that only Roman gods were worshipped, and only in the traditional Roman way.

Their anger toward the Veientes was put on hold until the following year, when Gaius Servilius Ahala and Lucius Papirius Mugillanus were consuls.

Superstitious beliefs delayed what should have been an immediate declaration of war and the deployment of armies. They felt it necessary to first send fetials to demand restitution.

There had been recent battles with the Veientes at Nomentum and Fidenae, followed by a truce, not a peace treaty. The truce had expired, as the Veientes had resumed hostilities even before it ended. Despite this, fetials were sent, but when they demanded restitution according to ancient custom, they were ignored.

A debate then arose over whether the plebeians should order a war or if a Senate decree would be enough. The plebeian tribunes threatened to halt the draft, forcing Consul Quinctius to consult the people about the war. All the centuries voted in favor of it. In this matter too, the plebeians showed their superiority by ensuring that consuls wouldn't be elected for the next year.