**4.32** While the City was in a state of panic, Dictator Aemilius sent messengers through the streets and called the worried citizens to a meeting, at which he began to scold them by saying that they let their thoughts be swayed by trivial fluctuations of fortune. This small defeat wasn't due to the enemy's bravery or the Romans' cowardice, but by the disagreements between the generals. There is no need to fear the Veiian enemy, who have been defeated six times, and Fidenae, which had almost been captured more times than it had been attacked.

The Dictator reminded them that the Romans and their enemies were the same as they had been for many centuries. They had the same spirit, the same physical strength, and carried the same weapons. And he, Mamercus Aemilius, was the same Dictator who previously defeated the armies of the Veientes and Fidenates, with the added help of the Faliscans at Nomentum. The Master of the Horse, Aulus Cornelius, was the same man who would be the same in the field. He was the military tribune in a previous war who had killed Lars Tolumnius, the king of the Veientes, in front of both armies, and brought the spolia opima to the Temple of Jupiter Feretrius.

He urged them to remember that their past Triumphs, spoils, and victories were with them, while their enemies had the guilt of killing the ambassadors in violation of the Law of Nations, of slaughtering the colonists at Fidenae during peacetime, of breaking a truce, and now a seventh disastrous revolt. They should now take up arms.

As soon as the camps were brought together, the Dictator was confident that the joy of these very wicked enemies over the disgrace of the Roman army wouldn't last long. The Dictator was also confident that the Roman people would realize how much better off the Roman Republic was when they nominated him Dictator for the third time as compared to those who tried to tarnish his second dictatorship because he ended the tyranny of the censorship.

After making his vows to the gods and starting his march, Dictator Aemilius set up his camp fifteen hundred paces from Fidenae, protected on his right by mountains and on his left by the Tiber River. He instructed his legate, Consular Tribune Quinctius Poenus, to secure the mountains and to seize, in secret, a ridge that was directly behind the enemy.

The next day, the Etruscans came onto the field full of confidence because of their accidental success the previous day from good luck, not good fighting. The Dictator, after waiting a little until scouts reported that Quinctius had reached the ridge near the Fidenae citadel, brought out his standards and led his line of infantry into position at a very fast pace. He ordered the Master of the Horse not to start the fight without orders; that he would give the signal for the cavalry's help when it was necessary. He reminded him of his fight with King Tolumnius and the spoils of war he had taken, and of Romulus and the Temple of Jupiter Feretrius.

The Dictator then led the Roman legions into battle with great suddenness and fierceness. Filled with hatred, the soldiers expressed their utter rage in both action and word, calling the Fidenates traitors, and the Veientes thieves, trucebreakers, stained with the murder of ambassadors, covered with the blood of Roman colonists, faithless as allies, and cowardly as soldiers.