**2.24** Amid these debates, a more serious threat emerged. A Latin messenger arrived in Rome at full speed, bringing the alarming news that the Volscian army was now advancing to attack the City. This report had a different impact on the patricians and the plebeians due to the anger that had divided the state. The plebeians were overjoyed, believing that the gods were punishing the tyranny of the patricians. They encouraged each other not to enlist, arguing that it was better for all to perish together than for them to die alone. Patricians, they said, should put on their armor and serve as soldiers! They should face the dangers of war, as they were the ones who profited from it the most!

The Senate, however, was filled with fear and confusion because now there were threats from both their own people as well as the enemy. They pleaded with Consul Servilius, known for his conciliatory nature, to save the state from these threats. The Consul adjourned the Senate and appeared in the assembly to address the people. The Senate was concerned about the people's interests, he said. However, the imminent threat of war facing the whole Republic had interrupted their deliberations concerning one part of the City. Nor could he, when the enemy were almost at the gates, deal with any issue other than the war itself. Even if there were extra time for discussion, he argued that it was dishonorable for the plebeians to refuse to take up arms for their state until they had received a reward. It was also dishonorable, he argued, for the senators to be forced to help the citizens who were afflicted out of fear. Instead, they should be allowed to do this out of their own free will.

To prove to the people that they could put their trust in him, the Consul issued an edict stating that no Roman citizen shall be kept in bondage or imprisoned preventing him from enlisting for military service. He also declared that no one should seize, sell, or interfere with a soldier's property, children or grandchildren while serving in the army for the duration of their service. As soon as the edict was announced, those present in the Forum who were in debt bondage came forward and immediately enlisted. Enslaved debtors from all over the City left their creditors, since they had no right to retain them, and rushed to the Forum to take the oath to serve. This resulted in a flood of enlistees who showed more bravery and energy in the Volscian war than the others.

Consul Servilius then led his army against the enemy, setting up camp a short distance away from them.