**2.26** Immediately after this had happened, the Sabines also stirred fear in Rome, although the commotion was more real than the war. During the night, news came in throughout the City that the Sabine army had reached the Anio River, plundering the land and setting farmhouses on fire after they had stolen all their contents. Aulus Postumius, who had previously served as a dictator during the Latin war, was quickly dispatched with the cavalry to confront them. Consul Servilius followed him, leading a select group of infantry. The cavalry managed to eliminate most of the stragglers who had fallen behind the Sabine army, and the full Sabine legion didn't put up any resistance against the infantry when they finally caught up with them. The Sabines were too exhausted from their march and their nighttime looting to put up a fight. Many of them had overindulged in food and wine from the farms, so they barely had enough energy to flee. The Sabine conflict was thus reported and concluded in a single night.

The next day, as everyone had hoped that the wars had concluded and that peace was now assured everywhere, ambassadors from Aurunci arrived at the Senate declaring war unless Roman troops were pulled out from Volscian territory. The full Auruncian army had already left their home for Rome at the same time as the ambassadors. Then, news came in that the Auruncian army was spotted not far from Aricia. This caused such a commotion among the Romans that there was no time for the Senate to give an order to the consuls, nor could they give a peaceful response to the Aurunci who were already bearing arms, while they themselves were arming and preparing for war. So, the Romans marched in battle formation to meet them in Aricia. The two armies engaged not far from that town, ending the war in a single battle.