**2.27** Having defeated the Aurunci, the Roman soldiers, who had won many wars within a few days, now waited for the promises of Consul Servilius and the Senate to be fulfilled. However, Appius Claudius, known for his innate love of tyranny and his desire to discredit his colleague, issued harsh decrees about borrowed money.

People who had previously been bound by debts were handed back over to their creditors. Even worse, new citizens were now also taken into custody. When a soldier was affected by this, he would appeal to Consul Servilius, and a crowd would gather around him. They reminded him of his promises and their contributions to the wars, showing him their battle scars. Bring the matter to the Senate, they urged. Or, as a consul, help his fellow citizens. Or, as a general, be there for his soldiers.

Servilius was indecisive. He was moved by their pleas, but the current political situation made him delay deciding what to do. His colleague had the steadfast support of the entire patrician class. And so, by trying to play both sides, he didn't escape the anger of the plebeians, nor did he win the favor of the senators. The senators saw him as a weak popularity-seeker, and the plebeians saw him as a dishonest trickster. It soon became clear that he was as disliked as Appius Claudius.

A disagreement arose between the consuls about which of them should dedicate the Temple of Mercury. The Senate left the decision to the people. Whomever the people chose would also preside over the grain market, form a guild of merchants, and perform certain religious rites on behalf of the Pontifex Maximus. The people chose Marcus Laetorius, a centurion of the first rank, clearly done not to honor the man, as it was higher than his position merited, but was done solely to humiliate the consuls. Then, one of the consuls, along with the senators, began to rage against the plebeians even more.

However, the spirit of the plebeians was strong and they were pursuing a course far different than the one they planned. For despairing at first when they saw there was no aid from the consuls and the Senate, when they saw a debtor being dragged to court, they rushed in from all sides, gathering together and shouting, creating an uproar. The consul's sentence could not be heard over the noise, and, even when it could be heard, no one obeyed it. Violence became commonplace. The fear and danger experienced by debtors was now transferred over to the creditors, who were singled out by the mob and beaten up in front of the consul.

On top of this, a renewed fear of a war with the Sabines spread. However, when a draft was announced, no one enlisted. Appius Claudius was livid. He accused Servilius of betraying the Republic by currying the favor of the plebeians and remaining silent while not doing what he should have been doing: passing judgment against the debtors and raising troops for the draft by decree of the Senate. However, he said, the Republic wasn't altogether deserted, nor the consular authority thrown away. He, himself, single-handedly, would uphold the dignity of the consular office and the divine majesty of the Senate and that of his ancestors.

When the daily mob of unruly people gathered around him again, this time he ordered the arrest of a man who appeared to be the ringleader. As the lictors were dragging the man away, he invoked his right to appeal. The consul wouldn't have allowed the appeal, for he was quite confident how the people would decide. But in the end, he gave in, not in response to the clamor of the crowd, but to the prudent advice and authority of the senators around him who persuaded him reluctantly to yield. Appius Claudius, the proud man that he was, was more than prepared to be hated by the people.

The situation became more serious every day, not only through open protests but, what was far more dangerous, through secret meetings and plotting by the plebeians. Eventually, the consuls, who were universally hated by the plebeians, left office. Servilius was equally hated by both sides and Appius Claudius was hated by the plebeians but praised by the senators.