**4.60** Nothing, it was said, was ever welcomed by the plebeians with such joy. They flocked to the Curia, grasping the hands of those exiting and calling them true fathers. No one, they confessed, would hesitate to risk their life or shed their blood in defense of such a generous City, at least as long as they had the strength to do so. Not only were they elated that their personal property would remain untouched while they devoted their bodies to the interests of the state, but this was offered voluntarily, without ever being brought up by the plebeian tribunes or discussed among themselves.

The plebeian tribunes were the only ones not sharing in the general joy and harmony among the different classes. They observed that these benefits to the plebeians might not bring as much joy or honor to the patricians as they thought. The measure seemed better at first glance than it would prove to be in practice. Where would the money for this come from, if not from taxing the plebeians, themselves? It seemed as if the patricians were generous to some with money taken from others. Those who had already served their time in the military wouldn't tolerate new soldiers serving under better conditions than they had. After all, the same individuals who had to pay the cost of their own service would now be taxed to pay for the service of others. These arguments swayed some of the plebeians.

When, at last, the tax was announced, the plebeian tribunes publicly stated that they would protect anyone who refused to contribute their share for the soldiers' pay. Still, the patricians continued to support the initiative. They were the first to contribute, and since there was no coined silver yet, some of them made their contributions in heavy bronze, transported to the treasury in wagons, so that they would make their contributions visibly noble and impressive to all.

After the Senate had conspicuously contributed according to the rate at which they were assessed, the leading plebeians, who were friends of the patricians, also began to contribute according to a prearranged plan. Then, when the plebeians saw these men being praised by the patricians and respected as good citizens by the military-aged men, the plebeians ignored the plebeian tribunes and they, too, began to compete to pay the tax.

After the law was passed to declare war on Veii, the new consular tribunes led an army, largely made up of volunteers, to Veii.