**7.31** After the ambassadors withdrew, the Senate discussed their request. Many believed that their city, the largest and most opulent in Italy, with the most fertile land and near the sea, would serve as a storehouse for a variety of food for the Roman people. However, the Senate valued their commitments more than these benefits.

The consul, under the Senate's guidance, responded: "Campanians, the Senate believes you deserve help. But we must establish a friendship with you that doesn't violate any previous friendships or alliances. We have a treaty with the Samnites. Therefore, we can't provide you with weapons to fight the Samnites, as it would be a breach of our duty to the gods and to men. As required by divine and human law, we will send ambassadors to our allies and friends to ask that no harm be done to you."

The head of the ambassadors responded as instructed by his home, "If you're unwilling to defend our possessions against violence and injustice, you'll at least defend your own. Therefore, senators, we surrender the people of Campania, the city of Capua, their lands, the temples of the gods, and all things divine and human, to your control, senators, and that of the Roman people. Whatever we suffer from now on, we will endure as men who have surrendered to you."

At these words, the ambassadors fell to the ground in tears on the porch of the Curia, extending their hands toward the consuls. The senators were moved by the change of human fortune, seeing an exceedingly wealthy nation known for luxury and pride, which had recently been asked for help by its neighbors, now so humbled that they surrendered themselves and all they owned to others. They also felt an obligation of honor not to betray those who had surrendered.

They didn't think the Samnites would act fairly if they attacked a territory and city that had become Roman property through surrender. Therefore, it was decided that Roman ambassadors would be sent to the Samnites immediately. They were instructed to present the Campanians' pleas, the Senate's response mindful of the Samnites' friendship, and the Campanians' final surrender. They would ask the Samnites, in light of their friendship and alliance, to spare their new subjects and not to bring war to the territory that had become Roman property. If the Samnites didn't agree, they were to be warned in the name of the Senate and Roman people to keep away from city of Capua and the Campanian territory.

When the ambassadors presented these issues to the Samnites in their council, they received a harsh response. The Samnites not only said they would continue the war, but, with the Roman ambassadors present, they had their magistrates leave the council and call together the commanders of the cohorts, loudly ordering them to begin marching immediately and loot the Campanian territory.