**7.37** After these events, the consul called an assembly and resumed speaking in praise of Publius Decius, not just for what he had done earlier, but now also for his newest accomplishments.

In addition to other military rewards, he gave Decius a golden crown and one hundred excellent oxen, including one particularly beautiful white ox with gilded horns. The soldiers who served with Decius received double rations of grain for life, and, for an immediate reward, an ox and two tunics. 

After the consul's gifts, the legions, approving the gift with a loud shout, crowned Decius with a grass and flower crown \[corona graminae\] a rare honor and a symbol of their escape from a siege. His own garrison that accompanied him placed on him another crown of the same honor. Adorned with these symbols, Decius sacrificed the beautiful white ox to Mars and gave the one hundred additional oxen to the soldiers who went with him on the mission. The legions also gave each of these same soldiers many pounds of grain and pints of wine. They did this with great enthusiasm and a military cheer, a sign of everyone's approval.

The third battle of the campaign took place near Suessula. The Samnites' army, routed by Consul Marcus Valerius, called up their best young men from home and decided to try their luck in one last, final battle.

Messengers from Suessula rushed to Capua, and from there, riders hurried to Consul Valerius to ask for help. Immediately the standards were raised, and the Roman troops were quickly mobilized. They left their baggage in the camp under strong guard so that they could move quickly and set up camp not far from the enemy. The area was a very small place which suited them because, apart from the horses of the cavalry, the rest of the pack animals, baggage train, and the disorderly crowd of servants were absent.

The Samnite army, as if anticipating no delay, were ready for battle and formed up in ranks. Then, seeing no one advancing to meet them, they marched with raised standards toward the Roman camp. When they saw soldiers stationed on the rampart and scouts reported that they had were camped in a small circle, the Samnites inferred that the Romans were few. The whole Samnite army began to shout that they should fill in the trenches, tear down the rampart, and storm their way into the camp. The war would have ended with their rashness if the Samnite generals hadn't restrained the soldiers' impatience.

As the Samnite army was so large, their supplies were running low after such a long siege at Suessula, delaying the fight. The Samnite generals then decided to let the soldiers go out into the country to forage for grain while they kept Suessula confined and starving. In the meantime, the Romans remained quiet, and, as lightly equipped soldiers, they brought as much grain as they could carry on their shoulders along with their weapons, and this was all that they needed. 

Consul Valerius, noticing that the enemy was now scattered throughout the fields and their posts were abandoned, rallied his men and led them to attack the camp. The camp was captured at the first shout and rush, with more of the enemy killed in their tents than at the gates and ramparts. He then ordered the captured standards to be gathered in one place and left two legions behind as guard and protection, strictly ordering them not to touch the spoils until he returned.

He then set out with his troops in formation. Cavalry was sent ahead to drive the scattered Samnites like hunted animals, killing many of them. The Samnites, in their panic, couldn't decide under which standard to regroup, nor could they decide whether to return to the camp or to flee further. Fear had made coordination nearly impossible. Their hasty flight caused them to leave behind forty thousand shields, though not that many were slain, and one hundred and seventy standards, including those captured in the camp, were brought to the consul. They then returned to the enemy's camp, and all enemy spoils were given to the soldiers.