**4.21** The next consuls were Marcus Cornelius Maluginensis and Lucius Papirius Crassus.

Leading the Roman army, the consuls invaded the lands of the Veientes and Faliscans. The spoils of men and cattle were carried off, but they found no enemy forces on the land. There were no battles, and cities weren't attacked due to an epidemic of illness among the people.

At home, Spurius Maelius, a plebeian tribune, and a relative of the wealthy grain merchant, tried to stir up sedition, but failed. Relying on the popularity of his famous name, Maelius scheduled a trial for Prefect Lucius Minucius and brought forward a proposal to seize the property of Gaius Servilius Ahala, claiming that his relative had been a victim of false accusations from Minucius. Servilius, he said, was guilty of putting a citizen to death without a trial.

However, when these charges were presented to the plebeians, they seemed frivolous considering who was making them. The plebeians were more concerned with the worsening epidemic and terrified of omens, as there were reports from the countryside of earthquakes that were so frequent and violent that they collapsed houses. Accordingly, the people performed a solemn religious ceremony of supplication led by the duumviri to seek relief.

The following year, with consuls Gaius Julius, for the second time, and Lucius Verginius, the plague caused such fear of devastation in the City and surrounding areas that no one ventured out of Roman territory to raid, and neither the patricians nor the plebeians thought of starting any military actions.

The Fidenates, who had initially barricaded themselves in their town, mountains, or fortifications, came down and began raiding Roman territory without provocation. They invited the Veiian army, as the Faliscans couldn't be persuaded to restart the war, despite the Romans' troubles and their allies' pleas. The two armies crossed the Anio River and displayed their standards not far from the Colline Gate. This caused as much fear in the City as it did in the countryside.

Consul Julius positioned his troops on the ramparts and walls, while Consul Verginius consulted the Senate in the Temple of Quirinus. They decided to appoint Quintus Servilius Priscus Fidenas as Dictator, who, some say, had the nickname of Priscus, while others say Structus. Verginius, stayed behind to consult his colleague, Consul Julius, and, with his permission, proclaimed Servilius as the Dictator that night. Dictator Servilius chose Postumus Aebutius Helva as his Master of the Horse.