**4.24** The situation was resolved more peacefully than anyone anticipated. The traders reported that the Veientes were denied assistance and were told to continue the war they had begun with their own resources. Since they hadn't consulted them in their initial plans, they shouldn't seek help now that things were not going well.

Dictator Aemilius, seeing that his chance for military glory was gone, and not wanting his appointment to be pointless, sought to do something during peacetime that would be a monument to his time as Dictator. He decided to limit the power of the censorship. He believed its powers were too great or that the duration of the office was too long.

Aemilius called a meeting and stated that the gods had been taking care of foreign relations and ensuring general safety. He would take care of internal affairs and protect the freedom of the Roman people. Now, he said, to increase protection of Rome even more, protection was needed so that powerful positions shouldn't last too long. Also, there should be a time limit for those positions which did not have a limit on their jurisdiction. Other offices were annual, but the censorship was five years' duration. His position was that it was unfair for the same individuals to have control over a significant part of life for so many years. He would pass a law that the censorship shouldn't last longer than a year and a half.

With popular support of the people, he passed the law the next day. Afterward, Aemilius said, "As you all know, Quirites, I don't like long-term authority. Here's my proof. Effective immediately, I resign my dictatorship." After limiting his own power and limiting the duration of another, he was escorted home amongst the praise and admiration of a large group of people.

The Censors, on the other hand, were livid that the now-former dictator had reduced the duration of their office. They punished him by removing him from his tribe, increasing his taxes eight-fold, and declaring him a member of the non-voting, lowest class of citizenry \[aerarii\]. Mamercus Aemilius handled this with dignity, focusing on the reason for the punishment rather than the punishment itself.

Even though they had disagreed with reducing the powers of the Censors, the leading patricians were upset with the Censors abusing their power. They realized that they, themselves, would more likely suffer under a Censor than to serve as one. At any rate, it's said that the people were so angry that only Mamercus Aemilius, himself, could prevent them from attacking the Censors.