**9.21** At the end of their term, the consuls, Gaius Junius Bubulcus and Quintus Aemilius Barbula, didn't hand over the legions to the new consuls they had elected, Spurius Nautius and Marcus Popillius. Instead, they gave control to Dictator Lucius Aemilius Mamercinus.

Dictator Aemilius, along with Lucius Fulvius Curvus as the Master of the Horse, began to lay siege to Saticula. In turn, this action provoked the Samnites to reignite hostilities. As a result, the Roman army faced a double threat. On one side, the Samnites gathered a large force to free their Saticulan allies from the Roman siege and set up their camp not far from the Roman camp. On the other side, the Saticulans suddenly opened their gates and rushed toward the enemy's posts with a great uproar.

Thus both forces, each trusting more in the hope of their allies' aid than in their own strength, soon began a pitched battle and pressed hard on the Romans. Although the battle was uncertain, Dictator Aemilius, despite having to fight two enemies simultaneously, managed to protect his line on both fronts. He chose a location that wasn't easily surrounded and posted his standards in different directions, keeping the flanks of his lines secure. Yet he focused more of his efforts on those who had rushed out from the town and, without much resistance, pushed them back within the walls. He then directed all his forces against the Samnites, where he encountered more resistance. But the victory, though it took a long time, was definite and uncontested.

The Samnites, forced to retreat into their camp, put out their fires at night and silently departed in formation. Giving up all hope of saving Saticula, the Samnites besieged Plistica, an allies of the Romans, hoping to inflict equal distress on their enemy.