**9.22** As the year drew to a close, the war was led by a new dictator, Quintus Fabius Maximus Rullianus. The new consuls, Lucius Papirius Cursor and Quintus Publilius Philo, both serving for the fourth time, stayed in Rome like their predecessors.

Dictator Fabius brought reinforcements to Saticula to take over the army from former dictator Aemilius.

The Samnites hadn't stayed at Plistica but had set up camp in the same place as before, calling for more troops from home and trying to draw the Romans into battle to distract them from their siege of Saticula. However, Dictator Fabius focused solely on Saticula's walls with the intent of taking the city. He was indifferent to the Samnites, merely setting up guards to protect his camp.

Such an act only emboldened the Samnites. They started aggressively approaching the rampart, not allowing the Romans any rest. And, when they finally came near the gates of the Roman camp, Quintus Aulius Cerretanus, the Master of the Horse, led a cavalry charge without consulting Consul Fabius, and drove them off.

At this point, in a type of combat that rarely leads to decisive results – cavalry skirmishes, Fortune stepped in and both sides suffered extraordinary defeats and the distinguished deaths of the commanders, themselves. The Samnite general first, angered at being routed after fiercely charging on his horse, rallied his cavalry and re-engaged in battle. He was easily spotted while rallying his cavalry and was killed by the Master of the Horse, who threw a spear so fiercely that it killed the horse with a single blow and threw the Samnite general off to his death.

Instead of being discouraged by their leader's death, the Samnites were enraged. Those nearby hurled their weapons at Aulius, who had recklessly charged through the enemy's troops. The gods gave the Samnite general's brother the honor of avenging his death. He pulled the victorious Master of the Horse from his horse and, full of grief and rage, savagely killed him.

The Samnites almost captured Aulius' body, as he had fallen among enemy troops. 

But the Romans immediately dismounted, forcing the Samnites to do the same. Around the bodies of their fallen commanders, a sudden infantry battle erupted. Inevitably, the Romans were clearly the victors, recovering Aulius' body and carrying it back to their camp with a mixture of grief and triumph.

Having lost their commander and having done all that they could do in the cavalry skirmish, the Samnites abandoned Saticula, which they deemed indefensible, and returned to the siege of Plistica. Within a few days, Saticula surrendered to the Romans, while Plistica fell to the Samnites by force.