**9.25** The consuls, having departed from Sora, directed their military efforts toward the territories and cities of the Ausonians \[Auruncians\].

After the battle of Lautulae had happened and the Samnites were advancing, everything in the region had been stirred up. Conspiracies formed in various parts of Campania, and even Capua, itself, wasn't free from suspicion. The situation even reached Rome, leading to investigations about some of the City's leading men. However, the Ausonian nation fell under Roman control from the betrayal of their cities, just as Sora had been.

The cities were Ausona, Minturnae, and Vescia – from these, twelve young men from prominent families, all having conspired to betray their cities, approached the consuls. They reported that their fellow citizens had long hoped for the arrival of the Samnites and had viewed the Romans as defeated after hearing about the battle at Lautulae. They had even aided the Samnites by providing young men and weapons. Now that the Samnites were driven out of the country, they were in a state of uncertain peace. They wouldn't close their gates to the Romans for fear of provoking an attack, but they were prepared to do so if the Roman army approached. In such a state of uncertainty, they could easily be taken off-guard and overpowered.

Following the advice of the men, the Roman camp was moved closer, and soldiers were dispatched to each of the three towns. Some were fully armed and in military dress, hidden near the walls, while others, were dressed in civilian attire with concealed swords under them. The soldiers posing as civilians were to enter the cities when the gates opened at dawn.

When dawn came, the gates opened and the disguised men immediately killed the gate guards. Then, they signaled the armed men to rush in from their hiding places. Thus, the gates were captured; the three towns were taken in the same hour using the same strategy. However, because the generals weren't present during the attacks, the resulting slaughter was uncontrolled. The Ausonian nation were wiped out, even though there was hardly any solid evidence that they had rebelled. It looked as if they had fought Rome to the end in a full-scale war of extermination.