**9.26** In that same year Luceria, betraying its Roman garrison to the enemy, was captured by the Samnites.

But the traitors didn't go unpunished for long. The Roman army was nearby and quickly recaptured the city, which was located on a plain, at first attack. The Lucerians and Samnites were all killed to the point of annihilation.

Having had to conquer them twice, Roman anger against Luceria was so intense that when the Senate discussed sending a colony there, many voted for its total destruction instead. The distance also made them reluctant to send their citizens to live so far among hostile nations. Eventually, it was decided that colonists would be sent, and two thousand five hundred people were relocated there.

During this year, when many places were turning against the Romans, secret plots among the nobles were forming in Capua and other places. When the Senate was informed, they didn't ignore it. Investigations were ordered, and it was decided that a dictator should be appointed to oversee these investigations.

Gaius Maenius was appointed Dictator, and he appointed Marcus Folius \[Foslius\] Flaccinator as Master of the Horse. The fear of the dictator was immense. 

Whether it was fear or conscience, Ovius and Novius, two brothers from the Calavius family, were unveiled as the main conspirators. They committed suicide before they could be formally charged. With the main subjects of the investigation in Campania had died down, the focus shifted to Rome.

The Senate's order was interpreted to mean that the investigation shouldn't only focus on Capua, but also on anyone, anywhere who had conspired or joined conspiracies against Rome. In addition, conspiracies that were formed for the purpose of obtaining offices were declared to be against the state. Investigations were expanded to include more people and issues. The Dictator didn't hesitate to say that his power to investigate was unlimited.

Some nobles were called to account, and even though they sought protection from the tribunes, no one intervened on their behalf no one protected them. The nobles, not just those who were charged but the whole group, collectively denied the charges. Charges didn't apply to nobility who could receive honors if no fraud stood in the way, they said, but only against "new men" \[homines novi\]. Even the Dictator and Master of the Horse themselves, they said, would be more fit to be defendants than judges in such a case – and they would realize this as soon as their term of office ended.

Dictator Maenius, now caring more about his reputation than his authority, then addressed the assembly:

“Citizens, you are all witnesses to my life up to this point, and this very honor bestowed upon me is proof of my integrity. I was not chosen as dictator, as is often the case, because the times required someone renowned in war, but because I had lived a life far from these conspiracies and could conduct investigations."

"However, certain noblemen joined together to undermine the investigations by attacking the questions, themselves. Why they acted so, I have no idea. Then, when these patricians found they lacked the power to stop the questioning, they refused to answer the questions asked and fled to the protection of their opponents, the plebeian tribunes, invoking the right of appeal to avoid court."

"Finally, when even these avenues failed them, they found every other refuge safer than clearing their names and turned their attacks on us. It was no shame for them as private citizens to demand the dictator be tried. So that all gods and men may know that even those who won't take responsibility for their own actions and cannot be tried, I will now meet their accusation head-on and offer myself as a defendant to my enemies. I resign the dictatorship. I ask you, consuls, if the Senate entrusts this matter to you, to begin the investigations with me and Marcus Folius \[Foslius\], so that it may become clear that it is our innocence, not the authority of our office, that protects us from such charges."

Dictator Maenius then abdicated his position. Immediately afterward, Marcus Foslius also gave up his office as Master of the Horse. They were the first to be tried by the consuls, as ordered by the Senate, and they were acquitted of all charges brought by the nobles.

Even Publilius Philo, who had held high offices and had done many great services, was brought to trial because he was disliked by the nobility, but he was acquitted. While the investigation remained fresh, other famous names were brought forward but their names were cleared as well.

The investigation then began to slide and lost its respectability when it started to target people of lower rank, and it was eventually stopped by the same factions and coalitions it was supposed to investigate.