**9.29** The war with the Samnites was almost over, but before the Roman Senate could be freed from that concern, news of a potential war with the Etruscans emerged. At that time, there was no nation, aside the Gallic uprisings, whose weapons were more terrifying than the Etruscans'. Their territory was nearby and they had a large population of men.

While Consul Valerius continued to fight the remaining Samnites, Consul Decius, who was gravely ill, stayed in Rome and, following the Senate's instructions, appointed Gaius Sulpicius Longus as dictator with Gaius Junius Bubulcus as Master of the Horse.

The Dictator, understanding the gravity of the situation, drafted all young able-bodied men under oath, and, with the utmost energy,  prepared weapons, and gathered supplies that were required. However, as well prepared as he was, he decided not to attack unless provoked by the Etruscans. The Etruscans had a similar strategy in preparing for war and then waiting, and neither side crossed their borders.

That same year, the censorship of Appius Claudius Caecus and Gaius Plautius gained distinction. Appius is more well-known in posterity, though, because he built the road named after him, the Appian Way, and the first aqueduct, Aqua Appia, to bring water into the city. He completed these projects alone because his colleague, embarrassed by conducting a scandalous and widely criticized revision of the Senate list, resigned from office. Appius, displaying the stubbornness long ingrained in his family, continued the duties of his censorship alone.

Under Appius' direction, the Potitii family, who were hereditary priests at the Ara Maxima altar of Hercules, instructed public slaves in the rites of the sacred service, delegating the responsibilities to them. It is said that by removing this from its sacred state it led to a strange event. Although there were twelve families of the Potitii at the time, with around thirty adult males, all of them died within the year, along with their children. Not only did the Potitii name vanish, but Appius, too, was punished by the gods' wrath and lost his sight a few years later for changing the tradition of the sacred rites.