**9.32** While these events were going on in Samnium, nearly all the Etruscans, except for the people of Arretium, had armed themselves and started a great war by attacking Sutrium, a city allied to the Romans which acted as a protective barrier against the Etruscans. Consul Aemilius set out to Sutrium with his army to free it from the siege.

As the Romans began arriving, the Sutrians generously brought a large amount of provisions into their camp, set up outside the city. On the other side, the Etruscans spent the first day deciding whether they should speed up or slow down the war.

The next day, the faster plan over the safer one was chosen to please the generals. As soon as the sun rose, the signal for battle was given and they marched out to the field.

When Consul Aemilius heard this, he immediately ordered the signal to be given for the soldiers to eat their meal, and once strengthened by food, they were to arm themselves. The order was followed. Consul Aemilius, seeing his men armed and ready, ordered the standards to be carried out beyond the ramparts. He lined up his men up a short distance from the enemy. Both sides stood for a long time, each waiting for the other to start the battle.

The sun had passed its highest point at noon before either side threw a weapon. Then, rather than leave without doing anything, the Etruscans gave the battle cry, sounded the trumpets, and their standards advanced. The Romans met the challenge with equal eagerness and the battle began in earnest. Both sides rushed into the fight with intense hostility. The enemy had more soldiers, but the Romans were more courageous. The battle was hard-fought, and many were killed on both sides – especially the bravest men.

Victory didn't show itself until the Romans' second line came to the front to replace the tired first line. The Etruscans, who didn't have any fresh reserves to support their front line, were overwhelmed and those in the front ranks and around the standards fell in battle. In no other battle was there seen less of a desire to flee or more bloodshed. The obstinate resolve of the Etruscans to die fighting prolonged the combat until nightfall, shielding them from complete destruction. So, the victors, not the defeated, were the first to stop fighting. After the sun set, the signal to retreat was given, and both sides returned to their camps during the night. 

For the rest of the year, nothing significant happened at Sutrium. The enemy's entire first line had been destroyed in one battle, leaving only the reserves, who were so few they barely had enough to guard the camp. As for the Romans, they suffered so many wounds that more men died from their injuries after the battle than had been killed in the field.