**9.37** The Consul's campaign didn't help to end the war; it expanded it. The devastation at the foot of Mount Ciminius was felt throughout the region and sparked so much outrage that the neighboring Umbria took up arms with the Etruscans.

As such, an army gathered at Sutrium that was larger than had ever been assembled before. They were so eager to engage in battle with the Romans that they moved their camp outside the forest and marched down to the open plains as quickly as possible to challenge them.

The enemy troops stood their ground for a while in the open air, leaving enough space for the Romans to form a battle line opposite them. However, when they noticed the Romans weren't eager to fight, they advanced toward the rampart. Even the Roman outposts had retreated from their posts to inside the fortification. A sudden outcry arose among the Etruscan leaders for their generals to bring them food; they would stay armed and attack the enemy's camp either that night or at dawn.

The Roman troops were equally eager for battle but were held back by the general's orders. Around the tenth hour, the consul ordered his men to eat.  He then ordered them to be armed and ready for action at any hour, day or night, when he gives the signal for battle. He then spoke to them briefly, praising the wars of the Samnites and belittling the Etruscans. This enemy, he said, could not compare to the previous foes they had faced, neither in terms of their quality as soldiers nor their numbers.

The Consul hinted at a secret plan to outmaneuver the enemy, saying that they would learn of it at the proper time but for now, silence was necessary. With these ambiguous remarks, he pretended the enemy were being betrayed, aiming to restore the morale of the troops which had been shaken by the size of the enemy forces. Given that the enemy had encamped near the rampart without fortifications, this deception seemed all the more plausible.

Refreshed with food, the soldiers rested. They were quietly woken around the fourth watch and armed themselves quietly. Servants were given pickaxes to level the rampart and fill in the trench. The lines of battle were formed within the fortifications, and select cohorts were stationed near the exits of the gates.

Then, the signal was given, just before dawn, the quietest time of sleepy summer nights. Roman lines exploded outward, destroying the rampart and charging in every direction to attack the sleeping enemy. Some were killed before they could react, others while they were still half-asleep in their beds. A greater number were frozen, trembling in fear, and were slaughtered.

A few had time to arm themselves. The Romans, following no certain signal, no leader, pursued the fleeing enemy. The enemy scattered in different directions, some toward the camp and some to the forest. The forest provided a safer refuge, as the camp, located on an open plain, was captured on that same day. Then Consul Fabius ordered all gold and silver to be brought to him, while the rest of the spoils were given to the soldiers. That day, around sixty thousand of the enemy were killed or captured.

Some say this famous battle took place on the other side of the Ciminian Forest, at Perusia, and that the city was in great fear that the army might be trapped in such a dangerous pass and overwhelmed on all sides by the Etruscans and Umbrians. Regardless of where the battle took place, it's clear that the Romans were victorious. As a result, ambassadors from Perusia, Cortona, and Arretium, which were then among the chief cities of the Etruscans, sought peace and a treaty with the Romans and secured a truce for thirty years.