**9.38** During these events in the Etruscan territory, the other consul, Gaius Marcius Rutilus, took Allifae from the Samnites by force. Many of their forts and smaller towns were either ruthlessly destroyed or were taken, intact, into Roman power.

At the same time, the Roman fleet, led by Publius Cornelius, whom the Senate had placed in charge of the seacoast, sailed for Campania and docked at Pompeii. 

Upon landing, the sailors and soldiers set out to raid the territory of Nuceria. They quickly devastated the nearest areas and could have safely returned to the ships. However, as is the custom, the sweet lure of more plunder led them to venture too far into the territory, provoking the enemy.

They encountered no resistance while they roamed the countryside, even though they could have been easily slaughtered. As they returned, however, moving in an unwary formation, the local farmers attacked them not far from their ships. They stripped them of their spoils and killed many of them. The remaining panic-stricken survivors, fleeing the slaughter, were driven back to the ships in disarray.

Consul Quintus Fabius' journey through the Ciminian Forest had caused great fear in Rome, but the report of the Roman army being trapped and surrounded brought joy to the Samnites. They recalled the Caudine Forks as showing what their defeat would be like. They said that the Romans, always eager for more conquests, were now stuck in a difficult situation,  having been led into inaccessible forests, trapped not so much by their enemies but by the difficult terrain.

Their joy was mixed with a certain envy because they thought the glory of ending the Roman war had been given to the Etruscans instead of the Samnites. So, they quickly gathered their forces to attack Consul Gaius Marcius. If he didn't give them a chance to fight, they planned to march through the lands of the Marsians and Sabines into Etruscan territory. 

Consul Marcius met them, and a fierce battle ensued with uncertain outcome on both sides. Although both sides suffered heavy losses, the Romans were seen as the losers because several men of the equestrian order, some military tribunes, and a legate were killed.

Even more notable, the Consul himself was injured.

The news, exaggerated as usual, greatly alarmed the Senate, and they decided to appoint a dictator. Everyone expected the choice to be Lucius Papirius Cursor, under whom the chief direction of military affairs was placed. But they were unsure if they could safely send a message into Samnium, where the situation was hostile, or if Consul Marcius was still alive.

The other consul, Fabius, had a personal grudge against Papirius. To prevent his private biases from interfering with the public good, the Senate decided to send representatives from the former consuls to persuade Fabius to put aside his personal feelings for the sake of the City not just by their own authority, but by the authority of the state.

The former consuls set out and delivered the Senate's decree to Fabius adding a suitable speech of their own, in accordance with the orders. Consul Fabius lowered his eyes to the ground, and silently walked away, leaving them unsure of his intentions. Then, in the quiet of the night, in silence as is his custom, he followed tradition and appointed Lucius Papirius as Dictator.

When the former consuls thanked him for his remarkable self-restraint and noble spirit, he remained obstinately silent and dismissed them without any answer or mention of what he had done. It was clear that his deep resentment was being suppressed by his strong will. Dictator Papirius Cursor then chose Gaius Junius Bubulcus as Master of the Horse.

As he was preparing to get approval for the army command at a meeting of the Curiae, a bad omen forced him to postpone it. The first Curia to vote was the Faucian, which was known for two disasters: the capture of the City and the Caudine Peace. These events had occurred in the years when this Curia had voted first. Licinius Macer believes this Curia is also unlucky because of a third disaster, the defeat at the Cremera, making the curia even more detested.