**9.46** In the same year, Gnaeus Flavius, son of Gnaeus, was a scribe born of a freedman father of humble circumstances. He was nevertheless a clever and eloquent man and he became a curule aedile.

Some annals suggest that when it appeared that he was to be elected aedile by his tribe, his name wasn't accepted because he was a scribe. When he found this out, he then gave up his tablet and swore not to continue in that profession. However, Licinius Macer argues that he had quit being a scribe long before, having already served as a tribune and as a triumvir, one conducted at night and the other for establishing a colony.

Moreover, Flavius defiantly stood firm against the nobles who looked down on him because of his humble background. He publicly displayed the rules of civil law, which had previously been kept secret by the pontiffs, by publishing the fasti \[legal calendar\] on white tablets around the Forum so everyone would know on which days court business could be conducted.

Despite the nobles' indignation, he dedicated the Temple of Concord in the area of Vulcan's Temple. The Pontifex Maximus, Cornelius Barbatus, was forced by the people to recite the dedication prayers, despite arguing that according to ancestral custom, only a consul or a commander could dedicate a temple. Accordingly, the Senate, with the authority of the people, passed a law that no one could dedicate a temple or altar without approval from the Senate or a majority of the plebeian tribunes. I relate this matter, not memorable by itself, but to show the freedom of the plebeians prevailing against the arrogance of the nobles.

Flavius once visited his sick colleague and when the young nobles didn't stand up to greet him, he ordered his curule chair to be brought in and enjoyed their envy from his seat of honor. Flavius was made an aedile by the urban party that had gained power through the censorship of Appius Claudius. Appius was the first to defile the Senate by enrolling the sons of freedmen into it. When this election wasn't recognized as valid, and he failed to gain the influence he sought in the Senate, he resorted to corrupting the assemblies of both the Forum and the Campus Martius by distributing men of the lowest order among all the tribes. This caused such outrage at Flavius' election that most of the nobles stopped wearing their gold rings and medals .

From then on, the state was divided into two factions. On one side were the men of integrity, who favored and cherished right principles, and the other side were the rabble of the marketplace.

This division lasted until Quintus Fabius and Publius Decius were made censors. Fabius, for the sake of unity and to prevent the elections from being controlled by the lowest of the people, divided the marketplace mob into four tribes which and gave them the name Urban.

This move was so well received that he earned the surname Maximus, which he hadn't obtained through his many victories but received from his reorganization of societal ranks. It's also said that he instituted the annual parade of the cavalry on the fifteenth of July.