**9.19** We must compare the forces either in terms of their numbers, or the type of soldiers, or in the number of auxiliaries. At that time, according to the census, there were two hundred and fifty thousand men liable for military service. This meant that during every revolt of the Latin allies, ten legions were almost entirely drafted from the City. During those years, it was common for four or five armies to be employed simultaneously, waging war in the Etruscan territory, in Umbria against the Gauls, in Samnium, and Lucania.

Then consider all of Latium, with the Sabines, and the Volscians, the Aequians, and all of Campania; part of Umbria and the Etruscan territory, and the Picentii, Marsi, Paeligni, Vestini, and the Apulians. We can also add the entire Greek coastal region of the lower sea, from Thurii to Neapolis and Cumae, and from there as far as Antium and Ostia. All of these would have been either powerful allies to the Romans or enemies already broken by war into submission.

Alexander would have had to cross the sea with his veteran Macedonians, totaling no more than thirty thousand infantry and four thousand cavalry, mostly Thessalians. This was the entirety of his strength. If he had brought Persians and Indians, and other nations, it would have been more of a burden than a support. 

The Romans, being on home territory, would have had recruits readily available. Alexander, waging war in a foreign country, would have found his army worn out with long service, as happened to Hannibal later.

As for weapons, they had a clipeus \[large, round shield\] and sarissa \[thirteen to twenty-foot-long spear\]; the Romans had a scutum \[long rectangular shield\], which covered the body more effectively, and a pilum \[a six-foot throwing javelin\], a much more powerful weapon than the spear, either in throwing or thrusting.

The soldiers, on both sides, were used to steady combat, and to maintain their ranks. But the Macedonian phalanx was immobile and composed of only one kind of soldier. The Roman line, less compact and consisting of diverse units, was easily divided and moved as needed, and just as easily joined together.

Now in work, who is equal to the Roman soldier in the construction of fortifications? Who is better suited to endure labor? If Alexander had been defeated in one battle, he would have been defeated in the entire war. What battle line could have broken the Romans, who were not broken by Caudium or Cannae?

In truth, even if events had been favorable to him at first, in fighting the Romans, Alexander would have often wished for the Persians, the Indians, and the unwarlike tribes of Asia as opponents and declared that his wars in the past had been waged with women. This is what King Alexander of Epirus is said to have remarked after receiving his fatal wound, when comparing the fortunes of the wars Alexander fought in Asia with those he himself had waged.

Indeed, when I consider that, in the first Punic war, the Romans maintained a contest with the Poeni \[Carthaginians\] at sea for twenty-four years, I can hardly believe that the life of Alexander would have been long enough to finish one war. And perhaps, if the Carthaginian power was united to the Roman power by ancient treaties, and as similar fears might arm these two nations against a common enemy, both powerful in men and arms, Alexander would have been overwhelmed simultaneously by the Punic and Roman wars. 

The Romans have had experience of the boasted prowess of the Macedonians in arms, not under Alexander as their general, or when their power was at its peak, but in the wars against Antiochus, Philip, and his son Perseus; without any losses, not even with any danger to themselves.

Let me not offend you by saying this, and let's not mention our civil wars; we were never defeated by an enemy's infantry, never in open fighting, never on equal terms, much less in our own lands. Our soldiers, burdened with heavy arms, may reasonably fear a body of cavalry, or arrows, difficult mountain passages, and places impassable to supply convoys. 

But the Romans have won, and will continue to win a thousand battles more formidable than those of Alexander and the Macedonians, so long as there is a love of the peace in which we now live and a civic commitment to harmony.