**2.17** The next consuls, Opiter Verginius and Spurius Cassius, initially tried to capture Pometia by force. When that failed, the Romans attempted to build wooden siege equipment like vineae \[protective roofs or sheds\] to aid in their efforts. However, the Auruncians, driven more by their deep-seated hatred for the consuls than by any real hope of victory, launched a counterattack. They stormed out of Pometia armed with flaming torches, causing fire and destruction wherever they went. They managed to burn down the vineae, parts of the siege equipment, and then killed and injured many of the Romans. They nearly killed one of the consuls, who had been thrown from his horse and badly injured. The identity of this consul isn't specified by historical sources. After this disaster, the Romans returned home. They carried a substantial number of wounded soldiers back, among them the Consul, whose condition was critical.

Following a brief period of recovery for the soldiers and a fresh addition of new soldiers and supplies, the consuls returned back to Pometia even angrier than before. This time, the wooden siege equipment had been prebuilt and other war preparations were made ahead of time. The Romans were ascending the walls when Pometia decided to surrender. However, the Romans weren't interested in accepting their surrender this time. In fact, it would have been better for the Pometians to fight, since the outcomes were ultimately the same. They beheaded the Auruncian leaders as if the city had been captured by force. The remaining townsfolk were sold off as slaves. Pometia was razed to the ground and the land was sold.

The consuls obtained a Triumph, not so much for the difficulty of the war which they had won, but more for the satisfaction of their revenge.