**4.53** Mamercus Aemilius Mamercinus and Gaius Valerius Potitus were the next consuls.

The Aequians were preparing for war. The Volscians also took up arms, but not with official sanction from their government. Instead, they joined the fight as paid volunteers. News of these enemies stirred up concern, especially as they had now moved into allied Latin and Hernician territory and Consul Valerius began to hold a draft. But Marcus Menenius, the plebeian tribune who had proposed an Agrarian Law, tried to hinder Consul Valerius from drafting soldiers. No one was forced to swear a military oath against their will, thanks to the protection of Menenius.

Suddenly, news arrived that the enemy had taken over the citadel of Carventum. This humiliation gave the Senate an opening to stir up popular resentment against Menenius. It also gave the other plebeian tribunes, who were ready to veto his Agrarian Law, a stronger reason to oppose their colleague. After a long period of dispute, the consuls, calling upon gods and men to bear witness that whatever disgrace or defeat had already been received from the enemy, or was imminent, the blame would lie with Menenius, who was obstructing the draft.

Menenius retorted that if the illegal occupiers, the patricians, would give up the public land, he would not delay the draft. The nine plebeian tribunes intervened with a decree, ending the dispute, declaring that, in accordance with the opinion of the college, they would support Consul Valerius in imposing fines and other penalties on those who refused to enlist, regardless of the veto of their colleague. As Menenius was being appealed to by the citizens for protection, Consul Valerius, armed and accompanied by a few attendants, grabbed Menenius by the neck. Out of fear, the potential recruits swore the military oath.

The army was sent to the citadel of Carventum. Despite their dislike of Consul Valerius, they managed to retake the citadel upon their arrival, having driven out the enemy's garrison. The Romans took advantage of the laxity of the enemy's generals, whose troops had gone away on a plundering campaign, creating an opening for them to attack. There was an abundance of loot the enemy had taken during their constant raids, and it had all been gathered into one safe area. Consul Valerius ordered the quaestors to sell the loot at auction and put the money into the treasury. He said that the army would share in the loot only when they served without resisting the draft.

This decision not to share the cache of loot once again increased the rage of the plebeians and soldiers. When Consul Valerius entered the city in an ovation, as decreed by the Senate, the soldiers sang rude verses abusing the Consul in typical military fashion. The Consul was ridiculed, while Menenius' name was celebrated in praises. At every mention of the plebeian tribune, applause and cheers by the citizens attending and the voices of the troops competed with each other. This caused more worry for patricians than the soldiers' mockery of the Consul, which had been a custom for a while. They feared that Menenius would be elected as a consular tribune. To prevent this, they arranged for an election of consuls.