**4.56** In Rome, the plebeians won a victory by securing the type of elections they wanted. However, the patricians were victorious in the outcome of the elections. Unexpectedly, three patricians were elected as consular tribunes: Gaius Julius Iulus, Publius Cornelius Cossus, and Gaius Servilius Ahala.

It was rumored that the patricians used a trick, which the Icilii accused them of at the time. They mixed a group of unworthy candidates in among the worthy ones. As a result, it created confusion and turned the people away from supporting plebeian candidates out of disgust at the notably disgraceful ones.

News arrived that the Volscians and Aequians, whether inspired by the retention of the Carventum citadel or angered by the loss of the Verrugo garrison, were preparing for war with the greatest strength. The Antiates were the main instigators of this plan. Ambassadors from Antium had traveled to the tribes of both nations, criticizing their cowardly behavior and saying that they had allowed the Romans to raid the previous year and the Verrugo garrison to be defeated. Now, not only were armed Roman troops going to be sent into their territories, but Roman colonies were being sent as well. The Romans weren't just distributing and keeping their property, but they had captured Ferentinum from them and given it to their allies, the Hernicians. After these complaints had stirred up emotions, a large group of young men from the Aequian and Volscian tribes were recruited wherever the ambassadors went. Then, the youth from all the tribes gathered in Antium, where they set up camp and waited for the Romans.

When these reports reached Rome, it caused more panic than necessary and the Senate immediately ordered a dictator to be nominated, as this was their final resort in dangerous situations. It's said that Consular Tribunes Julius and Cornelius resented this action greatly, and a bitter struggle followed. The leaders of the Senate, after complaining in vain that the consular tribunes wouldn't follow the Senate's decision, finally appealed to the plebeian tribunes. They claimed that, historically, even consuls had been forced by the Senate to appoint a dictator when placed in similar situations.

The plebeian tribunes, delighted by the disagreement among the patricians, stated that there was no help from those who weren't considered citizens or even as human beings. They then said that if the positions of honor were ever open and the government administration were ever shared, they would ensure that the Senate's decrees weren't undermined by the arrogance of magistrates. In the meantime, the patricians, who weren't restrained by respect for laws or for magistrates, would have to handle the consular tribunes by themselves.