**1.2** A short time later, the people of Lavinium were attacked. Turnus, the king of the Rutulians, was angry because Lavinia was supposed to marry him before Aeneas arrived. Turnus was particularly enraged that she preferred a foreigner like Aeneas over him. He declared war against Aeneas and King Latinus.

The Rutulians were ultimately defeated in battle, but neither side was happy with the outcome. While King Latinus' men and the Trojans did successfully protect Lavinium, King Latinus was killed. On the other side, Turnus and the Rutulian soldiers retreated; however, it didn't stop them. They felt outmatched and even questioned their own strength, so they asked for help from the Etruscans and their powerful King Mezentius, who held a lot of influence in Caere, an important city at this time. Mezentius had been unhappy about this new Trojan city, Lavinium, from the beginning. The Trojans were becoming too powerful. He felt they could threaten the safety of the neighboring states. So, Mezentius agreed to join forces with the Rutulians.

To win over the soldiers for the upcoming war, Aeneas decided to unite both the Trojans and the native inhabitants and call them "Latins" to honor the memory of King Latinus. He wanted everyone to be under the same laws and have the same name. After this, King Latinus' soldiers became as loyal and as dedicated to Aeneas as the Trojans, themselves, were. Aeneas, relying on the newfound unity of these two nations, decided to engage with the Etruscans, whose reputation was so great that it was known across Italy, from the Alps to the strait of Sicily,

A battle followed, during which Aeneas ordered the Latins not to defend from their walls but to go out in the field to meet the Etruscans. While the Latins won again, this was the last mortal battle Aeneas fought before he was slain. Whatever happened to him afterward, whether he became a god or not, is unclear. His tomb can be found today on the banks of the Numicius River, and the people have given him a deified name: Jupiter Indiges.