8.10 As the battle continued, the larger Latin forces gaining an advantage in some areas, Consul Manlius paused upon learning of his fellow consul's death. Having paid so memorable a death, he mourned with tears, as was right and just, praising his colleague's heroic death. 

After an appropriate time passed, he returned to the battle, unsure if it was time for the triarii to rise. He decided it was best to keep them fresh for the final attack and ordered the accensi to march forward from the rear, under fire, positioning them before the standards. As the accensi moved forward, the Latins, thinking the Romans had called their triarii, sent in their own triarii. After a long and intense fight, the Latin triarii were tired, and their spears were either broken or blunted. However, they were pushing back their enemies and believed the battle was almost over thinking they had reached the final battle line. At this point, Manlius called to the Roman triarii:

"Rise up now! With fresh energy, fight the enemy who are now tired! Remember your country and parents! Remember your wives and children! Remember your consul who has died to ensure your victory!"

When the Triarii rose in full force, fresh and gleaming in their armor, they formed a new line suddenly and unexpectedly. They received the antepilani through the gaps. With a deafening shout, they surprised the Latins, throwing their front lines into disorder. The triarii's long spears struck the faces of their enemies, eliminating the best of the Latin forces and tearing through the remaining maniples with devastating efficiency as if they were unarmed, escaping any harm themselves. This final assault of the Roman triarii inflicted such carnage that barely a quarter of the Latin army survived. Adding to the Latins' terror, the Samnites, gathered nearby at the foot of the mountain, posed an impending threat.

Yet among all the citizens and allies, the highest praise went to the consuls. One faced all the threats and dangers alone from the gods above and below and sacrificed himself for the army; the other showed great bravery and judgment in battle. It was easily agreed between both the Romans and Latins who handed down the memory of that battle to posterity, that whichever side Consul Manlius commanded, that side would undoubtedly have been victorious.

The defeated Latins fled to Minturnae. After the battle, the Romans captured the Latin camp and many survivors, mostly Campanians, were either killed or captured alive. They couldn't find Decius's body until the next day due to the darkness. They found him among the greatest mass of dead enemies, covered in weapons. His funeral was conducted by his fellow consul in a manner befitting the greatness of his death.

It's important to note that a consul, dictator, or praetor, when he dedicates the legions of the enemy to destruction, is not necessarily required to devote himself, but may choose any citizen from a Roman legion to devote,  If the chosen person dies, it is seen that the ritual has been done properly and is complete. If he does not die, then a sign at least seven feet tall or more must be buried in the ground and a sacrifice should be made. Where that sign has been buried, it is not lawful for a Roman magistrate to enter there.

However, if a magistrate wishes to devote himself, like Decius did, and he doesn't die, then neither his personal nor the state's religious rites will be conducted in a ritually pure manner, whether with a proper sacrificial victim or by any other means. Whoever devotes himself is permitted to vow his weapons to Vulcan or any other god he chooses. It is not lawful for an enemy to take possession of the weapon over which the consul, standing, made the devotion; should this happen, a sacrifice called a suovetaurilia must be made to Mars to atone for the act.