**8.4** Annius spoke after each man presented different views. He said, "Although I myself have stated what it would be desirable to answer, I believe it's more important for our common good to decide what we should do rather than what we should say. Once we've figured out the actions we will do, it'll be easy to adapt the words to fit with them."

"If we're now willing to accept slavery under the shadowy pretense of a fair treaty, what remains but to betray the Sidicinians? Should we then take orders not only from the Romans but also the Samnites, telling the Romans that we'll surrender our weapons whenever they express their desire?"

"But if a longing for freedom finally stirs your hearts; if the treaty and alliance means equal rights; if we are now at liberty to proudly claim that we share the same blood as the Romans, something we were once embarrassed about; if our army combined with theirs can double their power and be such a force that they wouldn't want to separate it when either starting or ending their own wars, then why isn't everything equal between us?"

"Why isn't one of the consuls chosen from the Latins? Where there is equal power, isn't there also equal participation in the government? This doesn't reflect a great honor on its own, as we still recognize Rome as the capital of Latium; but we have made it seem like an honor because of our long-standing patience. But if you ever wanted a chance to share power and assert your freedom, the opportunity is now here, given to you by both your own courage and the generosity of the gods." 

"You've tested the Romans' patience by denying them soldiers. Who can doubt that they were filled with anger when we broke a tradition of more than two hundred years? Yet they endured this resentment. We fought the Paelignians in our own name. The Romans, who previously didn't even allow us to defend our own lands by ourselves, didn't interfere. They heard that the Sidicinians were under our protection, that the Campanians had defected from them to us, that we were preparing armies against their allies, the Samnites; yet they didn't leave the city. Why this great patience on their part, if not from recognizing our strength and their own? I have reliable information that when the Samnites complained about us, the Roman Senate gave them a response that clearly indicated that even they didn't insist that Latium was under Roman control."

"Just assert your rights in demanding what they silently grant you. If fear prevents anyone from saying this, then I promise that I'll say it! Not only in the presence of the Roman people and Senate, but also of Jupiter himself, who resides in the Capitoline Hill; that if they want us to be in a partnership and alliance with them, they must accept one consul from us, and we must have a share in the Senate." When he bravely promised these actions, they all, with shouts of agreement, empowered him to do and say whatever he thought would benefit the Latin nation and his own honor.