**8.8** Nevertheless, the harsh punishment made the soldiers more obedient to their general. Guard duties, night watches, and post regulations were more diligently maintained. This strictness turned out to be very beneficial even in the final engagement, when it came down to the line of battle. The overall battle resembled a civil war, with everything being alike among the Romans and Latins, except for their loyalties.

Previously, the Romans used the small round shield \[clipeus\], but when they started receiving regular pay, they replaced their round shield with the a large oblong shield \[scutum\].

They previously fought in phalanxes \[a rigid line\] like the Macedonians, but later they adopted the manipular formation, arranging their lines in multiple units, with the rear ranks drawn up in several lines.

The front line was made up of the hastati, organized into fifteen maniples, with small spaces between them. Each maniple consisted of about twenty light-armed soldiers carrying only a spear or a heavy iron javelin, and a group of shield-bearers. These were the youngest men, just reaching military age.

Behind them came older, stronger, and more-experienced men, called principes, also arranged in fifteen maniples, all with scutum and distinguished by the heavier armor. 

This combined group of hastati and principes formed thirty maniples and was called the antepilani \["before the pilum"\] because behind their standards were another fifteen companies. Each company was divided into three parts, the first part called a pilus.

A pilus consisted of three standards \[vexilla\]. Each standard had sixty soldiers, two centurions, and one standard-bearer \[vexillarius\]. The company consisted of one hundred and eighty-six men. The first standard was led by the triarii, veteran soldiers of distinguished bravery; the second standard was led by the rorarii, younger men who were less capable due to their age and service; the third standard was led by the accensi, a group that was not very reliable and because of this, they were placed at the back.

When the army was arranged this way, the hastati were the first to enter the battle.

If the hastati couldn't push back the enemy, they fell back gradually squeezing through the gaps and were received by the principes in the ranks. The fight then fell to the principes, with the hastati behind them.

The triarii stayed kneeling behind the standards, their left leg extended forward, holding their shields on their shoulders, and their spears stuck in the ground, with the points up, looking like a line fortified by a bristling palisade. If the principes also couldn't make a big enough impact in the fight, they slowly retreated with the hastati, to the Triarii. This is where the saying, "Matters have come to the triarii," is used when matters are critical.

The triarii, after receiving the principes and hastati through the gaps in their ranks, rose up and pressed their shields together, blocking the openings, and then charged the enemy as one solid wall, with no other hope of retreat left. This was the most intimidating thing for the enemy, when, pursuing what they thought was a defeated army, they suddenly saw a new line rising up, increased in number and stronger than before.

About four legions were raised, each with five thousand infantry and three hundred cavalry. The same number was raised by the Latin allies, who were enemies of the Romans at that time, and they arranged their battle line in the same way.

Not only did the standards face each other – hastati against hastati, principes against principes – but also each centurion knew he could be fighting against an opposing centurion if the ranks were not disrupted. 

There were two senior centurions \[primus pilius\], one in each army, serving with the triarii. One, a Roman, was not physically strong, but he was brave and experienced in warfare. The other, a Latin, was physically strong and a great warrior. They knew each other well because they had always commanded equivalent ranks. Since the Roman lacked confidence in his ability to overcome the Latin, he had gotten permission from the consuls in Rome to choose anyone he wanted as his own deputy-centurion to protect him against the man destined to be his opponent. The young man, finding himself face to face with the Latin centurion in battle, defeated him. 

The battle took place not far from the base of Mount Vesuvius, on the road to Veseris.