**8.9** Before leading their armies into battle, the Roman consuls performed sacrifices. It's said that the haruspex showed Consul Decius a liver with a wound on the side that represented him. However, the sacrifice was otherwise pleasing to the gods. Consul Manlius, on the other hand, received very positive signs from his sacrifice. Decius said, "Everything is fine if my colleague's sacrifice is accepted by the gods." 

The armies were arranged in the previously mentioned order and they set off for battle. Manlius led the right wing, while Decius led the left. Initially, both sides fought with equal strength and fervor. However, the Roman hastati on the left couldn't withstand the powerful attack of the Latins and retreated to the principes.

In this moment of fear, Decius called out to Marcus Valerius, "Valerius, we need the gods' help. As the public pontiff of the Roman people, tell me what to say to devote myself to the legions." The pontiff instructed him to wear the praetexta toga, cover his head, and place his hand under the toga up to his chin. He was to stand on a spear placed beneath his feet and recite a prayer to the gods, saying:

"Janus, Jupiter, Father Mars, Quirinus, Bellona, Lares, Divi Novensiles, Di Indigetes, all gods with power over us and our enemies, and you, Divine Manes. I pray to you, I worship you, I seek your favor and implore that you may grant strength and victory to the Roman people, the Quirites, and that you strike terror, fear, and death into the enemies of the Roman people, the Quirites. As I have declared these words on behalf of the Roman people, the Quirites, along with the legions, auxiliaries and army of the Roman people, the Quirites, so do I devote the legions and auxiliaries of the enemy, together with myself, to Divine Manes, the god of the underworld, and to Mother Earth."

After saying this prayer, Consul Decius sent the lictors to tell Consul Manlius that he had devoted himself for the good of the army. He then put on a Gabine cincture, armed himself, vaulted onto his horse, and plunged into the thick of enemy lines. Both armies saw him as a majestic figure, somewhat more magnificent than human, as if sent from heaven as an atonement to appease the wrath of the gods, taking destruction away from his own people and transferring  it to the enemy.

Thus, fear and panic accompanied him. First, throwing the Latin front lines into chaos and then spreading to the entire army. This was most evident as, wherever he rode on his horse, men were paralyzed as if they'd just been hit a death-dealing star. When the Consul fell to the ground, overwhelmed by a rain of spears, the Latins were visibly shaken and fled the field in disarray, leaving it empty.

At the same time, the Romans, free from religious worry, delivered a fresh attack just as if the signal had been given and the battle had just started. The rorarii also moved forward joining the antepilani, adding strength to the hastati and principes, while the Triarii waited on one knee for the consul's signal to rise.