**4.58** During that year, the truce with Veii ended, and the process of demanding restitution began through ambassadors and fetials. Upon reaching the borders, they were met by a delegation from Veii. The Veientes asked that the ambassadors and fetials not proceed to Veii until they had first spoken to the Roman Senate.

Back in Rome, the Senate agreed that, due to the Veientes' internal civil wars, restitution wouldn't be demanded from them this year. The Romans did not take advantage of the Veientes' troubles for their own gain.

And, in the Volscian territory, the Romans suffered a disaster with the loss of their garrison at Verrugo. The timing was so crucial that the Roman soldiers who were under siege by the Volscians and begging for assistance could have been saved if help had arrived sooner. However, the relief force only arrived in time to surprise the enemy, who, having just killed the Roman garrison, were scattered in search of plunder. The cause of the delay was attributed to both the Senate and the consular tribunes, who were given information that the soldiers were holding their ground courageously. They didn't adequately consider that there is a limit to human endurance, which no amount of courage can surpass. However, these heroic soldiers weren't unavenged, whether living or dead.

In the following year, Publius and Gnaeus Cornelius Cossus, Numerius Fabius Ambustus, and Lucius Valerius Potitus, were consular tribunes.

A war with Veii threatened the Romans due to a disrespectful response from the Veiian senate that occurred. It seems that when the Roman ambassadors demanded restitution from the Veientes this year, as they had said they would do, the Veiian senate instructed them to leave the city and territories immediately, or else they would face the same fate that Lars Tolumnius had given the previous ambassadors.

The Roman Senate, outraged by such a response, decreed that the consular tribunes should propose a declaration of war against the Veientes and bring it to the people the very next day. However, when the announcement was made, the young men expressed their dissatisfaction. They argued that the war with the Volscians wasn't yet over. Two garrisons had recently been completely destroyed, and the remaining garrisons were barely holding on. There wasn't a single year in which they hadn't fought in wars. And, as if the people hadn't already fought enough, a new war was being started with a nearby and very powerful nation, which could potentially incite all of the Etruscans against Rome.

These grievances, initially discussed among themselves, were further inflamed by the plebeian tribunes. Once again, the plebeian tribunes claimed that the most significant war was between the patricians and the plebeians because it was the plebeians who were deliberately burdened with military service and butchered by the enemy. It was the plebeians who were kept away from the City, as if exiled, for fear that while resting at home they might think about their freedom, or establishing colonies, or obtaining some of the public land, or the right to vote freely. And grasping the hands of the old veterans, they counted up each man's years of military service, their wounds and scars, insistently asking what part of the body still remained whole, fit for receiving new wounds, and how much blood was left that could still be given for the Republic.

After discussing these issues in private conversations and public speeches, they created a reluctance among the people to go to war against the Veii. As a result, the proposal was postponed, as it would have been rejected due to the prevailing discontent.