**3.38** The fifteenth of May came and went. The decemvirs' term of office had expired. However, no new election of officials had taken place. The decemvirs were now considered ordinary citizens but they continued as decemvirs, continuing to assert their authority and flaunting the symbols of power. It seemed like a form of royal oppression.

Freedom was mourned as if it were gone forever, with no one stepping up to fight for it. This despair wasn't only felt by the citizens themselves, but also by neighboring states who looked down upon them, outraged that power could exist where freedom was lost.

The Sabines, with a large army, invaded Roman territory and caused widespread destruction, taking away both men and livestock as spoils with no one to stop them. They then withdrew the army, which had ranged far and wide, to Eretum. There they set up camp, hoping that the lack of harmony in Rome would stop the draft and prevent the formation of a Roman army.

Not only did the news spread of this invasion, but the flight of the country people into and through the city also caused panic. The decemvirs, with no support from either patrician or plebeian, were uncertain about what to do.

The plebeians and patricians were further alarmed by another disaster. The Aequians, from the opposite side, set up camp at Algidum, and from there were making raids into the Tusculan territory. Ambassadors from Tusculum came asking for help from Rome, reporting that their land was being ravaged.

Fear struck the decemvirs so deeply that, with two wars surrounding the City, they resolved to consult the Senate. They ordered the senators to be summoned to the Curia, knowing they would face a storm of anger and expecting to be blamed for the destruction of the land and other impending dangers. They also understood that there would be attempts to abolish their rule unless they resisted unanimously and actively suppressed any aggressive attempts using force, if necessary.

When the voice of the herald announced in the Forum that the senators were to meet in the Curia before the decemvirs, it caught the attention of the plebeians as if it were a new thing. They were surprised, as the decemvirs had long since neglected the customary consultation of the Senate. The astonished plebeians wondered why the decemvirs were resuming a forgotten practice after such a long time. The plebeians, for once, were grateful to both the enemy and their wars for bringing back some semblance of their former free state. The people searched for a senator in the Forum but found few.

The plebeians then noticed the Curia and saw the decemvirs were surrounded by emptiness, as both they themselves and the plebeians acknowledged the unpopularity of their rule; and the plebeians, interpreting this to mean that private citizens had no right to summon the Senate, believed the senators were not gathering in protest.

Already, they thought, a leader was emerging for those seeking to reclaim liberty. The plebeians, watching this, began to murmur to themselves about joining the Senate's rebellion. If the senators wouldn't gather for the Senate, so too would they reject the military draft.

Not only were there were no senators in the Forum, but also there were few senators to be found in the City. Disgusted with the situation, the senators had long since retreated to their country homes to focus on their own affairs, as their own public role had been lost. They were distancing themselves from injustice as much as they were distancing themselves from the company and contact of lawless rulers.

When the summoned senators continued to ignore orders to assemble, the decemvirs sent messengers to their homes to impose penalties for non-attendance and find out whether their absence was intentional or not. The messengers brought back the news: the senators were, indeed, out in the countryside. The decemvirs gave them the benefit of the doubt; being out in the country was a much better outcome than being inside the City and outright rejecting them. They ordered all the senators to be summoned for a meeting the next day.

The meeting was attended by more senators than even the decemvirs, themselves, had expected. It made the plebeians feel that their freedom was being betrayed. They saw that the senators had obeyed the orders of the decemvirs, whom they viewed as having left the office and were ordinary citizens. With no visible use of force, the senators were now giving the decemvirs the right to command them as if being compelled by law.