**3.39** The senators demonstrated more in obedience than servility in attending the meeting in the Curia, as we have heard accounts say.

It's remembered that Lucius Valerius Potitus, after a proposal had been introduced by Appius Claudius, but before formal votes were taken in order, demanded to speak on the state of the nation first. When the decemvirs tried to silence him with threats, he declared that he would take his case to the plebeians, which created quite an uproar.

We also know that Marcus Horatius Barbatus showed equal courage in going into battle against the decemvirs by calling them "ten Tarquins" and reminding them that the Valerii and Horatii had driven out the kings.

At that time the plebeians weren't disgusted by the name "king," he said. After all, it was commonly used to refer to Jupiter Optimus Maximus and it was the word by which Romulus, the City's founder, and his successors were also known. The word was even preserved in religious ceremonies. Instead, what the plebeians despised was the pride, violence, and atrocities of the king.

If such behavior was unacceptable in a king, or even in a king's son, why should it be tolerated in the ex-decemvirs who are now private citizens? By suppressing free speech in the Senate, the decemvirs might force louder voices expressing their concerns outside the Senate.

And why did he have less right, as a private citizen, to call the plebeians to an assembly than for the decemvirs, who were now private citizens, to summon the Senate? The decemvirs should test, whenever they wish, how much stronger the people's desire to defend their freedom is, than the decemvirs' desire to defend unjust domination.

The decemvirs referred to the Sabine war as if there were any war more important for the Roman plebeians to fight than a war with those who, elected to create laws, were lawless themselves and had stripped away everything of legal authority in the state. They had abolished annual elections, the annual magistrates, and the regular succession of rulers, which was the only way to ensure equal liberty. Why, despite being private citizens, did the decemvirs still hold the fasces and the power of despotic kings? After the kings were expelled, the magistrates appointed were patricians, and later, following the plebeians' secession, plebeian magistrates were appointed.

Which group did the decemvirs belong to? Were they plebeians or patricians? If they were plebeians, what had the decemvirs ever done with the plebeians' approval? If they were patricians, why had they not convened a Senate meeting for almost a year? And now that they have, they prevent anyone from sharing their views on the political situation.

Don't place too much reliance on other men's fear, Horatius said. The hardships men were currently enduring are far greater than any they may fear in the future.