**7.16** In the following year, a law was passed that wasn't well-received by the patricians during the consulship of Gaius Marcius Rutilus, a plebeian, and Gnaeus Manlius Capitolinus. Enacted by Marcus Duilius and Lucius Maenius, plebeian tribunes, the law concerned a reduction of loan interest rates to twelve percent, and the people passed it with great enthusiasm.

In addition to the wars decided upon the previous year, the Faliscans rose up and emerged as new enemies. They were charged with two offenses. First, that their young people had joined forces with the Tarquinians, and second, because they had refused to return those Romans who had fled to Falerii after the Tarquinians were defeated, despite the demands of the Roman fetials.

Consul Gnaeus Manlius was assigned to deal with the Faliscans, while Consul Marcius led the army into the territory of Privernum. This area had been left alone due to a long period of peace, and the soldiers were able to gather a lot of loot. Marcius added to his popularity by not setting anything aside for the treasury, instead allowing the soldiers to use it to build their own private fortunes.

When the Privernates positioned themselves in a well-defended camp in front of their own walls, Consul Marcius called the soldiers to an assembly. "I now give to you the camp and city of the enemy for plunder, if you promise me that you'll fight bravely and that you aren't more prepared for plunder than for fighting." The soldiers responded with loud cries for the signal and, filled with confidence, they went into battle ferociously.

Sextus Tullius, the first centurion who has been mentioned before, led the charge in front of the standards, crying out to Consul Marcius, "Look, general, and see how your army keeps the promises it gave you!" He discarded his spear and, taking his sword in hand, charged at the enemy. All of the front-line soldiers followed Tullius and at the first attack quickly put the enemy to flight. They pursued the fleeing enemy to the town where the Romans had already raised the ladders and were about to scale the walls. The city immediately surrendered. A Triumph was held over the Privernates.

Consul Manlius didn't achieve much of note, except to set a precedent by passing a new law at the camp at Sutrium regarding charging a tax of one-twentieth of the value of those set free from slavery by their former owners. This law added a significant amount of revenue to the treasury, which was running low, and was approved by the Senate. However, the plebeian tribunes, more concerned about the precedent than the law itself, passed a law making it a capital offense for anyone to summon an assembly of the people away from the City. If this was allowed, they feared, soldiers away at war who had sworn allegiance to their consul could enact any law, no matter how harmful to the people, if it were permitted.

That same year, Gaius Licinius Stolo was prosecuted under his own law and was fined ten thousand aes rude by Marcus Popilius Laenas. This was because Licinius owned one thousand jugera of land with his son and had tried to evade the law by emancipating his son.