**7.17** The next year, Marcus Fabius Ambustus was elected consul for the second time, and Marcus Popilius Laenas, also for the second time.

They faced two wars. The first was a conflict with the Tiburtines and it was straightforward, which Consul Laenas easily handled. He drove the enemy back into their city and destroyed their lands.

However, the other war was more serious, in which the Faliscans and Tarquinians defeated Consul Fabius at the start of the battle. Here, the Roman troops panicked after seeing an unusual spectacle: enemy priests rushing toward them carrying flaming torches and holding out snakes before them. Their unusual appearance unsettled the soldiers who, stunned and astonished, retreated back to their fortifications in a panicked procession. When the consul, legates, and tribunes began to mock and scold them for being scared like children by empty superstitions, shame suddenly changed their minds. They charged blindly at the very things they had run from.

Having thus scattered the enemy's trick of torches and snakes, they attacked those who were armed, breaking the enemy line. They also took control of the enemy's camp that day, and having obtained a lot of spoils, they returned victorious, making jokes about the enemy's trick and their own panic.

After this, the entire Etruscan nation was stirred up and, with the Tarquinians and Faliscans as leaders, they came to Salinae. In response, Gaius Marcius Rutilus was appointed Dictator, the first plebeian to hold this position. He named Gaius Plautius Proculus, also a plebeian, as Master of the Horse. The patricians saw this as an insult, that the dictatorship was now open to the plebeians, and they did everything they could to prevent the Dictator from getting the resources or orders needed to carry out the war.

The people, however, in their enthusiasm, voted promptly to what was proposed by Dictator Rutilus. He left the City, moving along both sides of the Tiber River and transported his army on rafts wherever he had information about the enemy. He caught many of the raiders off-guard, as they wandered around in scattered groups destroying the lands. He also captured their camp in a surprise attack. With eight thousand of the enemy taken prisoner, and the rest either killed or driven out of Roman territory, he celebrated a Triumph by order of the people, without the approval of the Senate.

The Senate didn't want the consular elections to be held by a plebeian dictator or a plebeian consul, and since Consul Fabius was held up by his war, the situation led to an interregnum. There were then successive interreges: Quintus Servilius Ahala, Marcus Fabius, Gnaeus Manlius, Gaius Fabius, Gaius Sulpicius, Lucius Aemilius, Quintus Servilius, and Marcus Fabius Ambustus. 

In the second interregnum, a dispute arose because two patrician consuls were selected. The plebeian tribunes tried to veto it but Fabius, the interrex, said that according to the Twelve Tables, whatever the people had last ordered would be considered a valid and binding law; thus, the people's votes were to be observed. Since the plebeian tribunes could do no more than delay the elections, two patricians chosen as consuls: Gaius Sulpicius Peticus, for the third time, and Marcus Valerius Publicola. They took office that same day.