**7.24** The Romans still hadn't yet secured victory. Another mass of enemies remained on the field for those who had descended onto the plain. The Gauls, in their vast numbers, remained undeterred by the disaster they had just faced. They rallied fresh troops against the Romans, almost as if a new army had risen.

The Romans halted their advance. They were weary and were facing another round of combat. Consul Popilius, while carelessly moving among the front lines, had been nearly killed when his shoulder was pierced by a Gallic spear, causing him to withdraw briefly from the battlefield. The delay almost let victory slip away from the Romans. However, the Consul, after having his wound bandaged, returned to the front lines:

"Soldiers, why do you stand idle?" he shouted, "You aren't facing Latin or Sabine enemies, whom you can make an ally after defeating them. We're fighting against beasts. We must either shed their blood or give them ours. You have pushed them back from their camp, you have thrown them headlong down into the valley, you stand on the backs of your defeated enemies who are lying on the ground. Now fill the plains with the same slaughter as you have filled the mountains. Don't wait for them to flee, you, who are standing still; advance your standards, move against the enemy."

Stirred by these words, the Romans pushed back the Gauls' front lines and broke through their center by forming wedges. The Gauls, now scattered and without proper command, turned their weapons on each other in confusion. They fled across the plains, past their own camp, and toward the citadel of Alba – the highest point they could see. Consul Popilius didn't chase them beyond the camp due to his injury and not wanting to risk his tired army against the enemy on the hills. He gave all the spoils of the camp to the soldiers and led his victorious and enriched army back to Rome.

Consul Popilius' injury delayed the Triumph, and the Senate, due to the same reason, desired a dictator to hold the elections as both consuls were ill.

Lucius Furius Camillus was nominated Dictator, with Publius Cornelius Scipio as his Master of the Horse. Dictator Furius restored the consulship to the patricians. For this service, Camillus was elected consul, with great zeal of the senators, and appointed Appius Claudius Crassus as his colleague.