**2.63** During these conflicts, while domestic disagreements persisted, Titus Numicius Priscus and Aulus Verginius were next chosen as consuls.

The plebeians would no longer tolerate any further postponements of the Agrarian Law. A violent protest was being plotted when it was discovered, through the smoke of burning farms and the fleeing of farmers into the City, that the Volscians were approaching. This situation halted the rebellion, now on the verge of erupting. The consuls, immediately compelled by the Senate, led the young men out of the City to war, and this calmed the rest of the plebeians. The enemy, having done nothing more than scare the Romans with baseless fear, marched away quickly in retreat.

Consul Numicius went to Antium to fight the Volscians, while Consul Verginius fought against the Aequians.

With the Aequians, a significant defeat was narrowly avoided due to an ambush, but the courage of the soldiers restored the Roman dominance which had been jeopardized by the consul's negligence. Matters were handled better against the Volscians. The enemy was defeated in the first battle and forced to retreat into the city of Antium, a very affluent and prosperous place in those times. The consul, not daring to attack Antium, seized another town, Caeno, from the people of Antium, which wasn't as affluent.

While the Aequians and Volscians occupied the Roman armies, the Sabines plundered the Roman lands all the way to the City gates. A few days later, however, the Sabines suffered more destruction than they had inflicted as the two consuls angrily entered the Sabine territories and destroyed it.