**2.64** Toward the end of the year, there was a brief period of peace. However, as usual, it was disrupted by conflicts between the patricians and the plebeians. The plebeians, out of frustration, refused to participate in the consular elections this year. As a result, Titus Quinctius and Quintus Servilius were elected consuls by the patricians and their clients.

Their year in office was similar to the previous one, starting with turmoil at home and ending with peace due to an external war. The Sabines, quickly moving across the plains of Crustumerium, committed massacres and arson along the banks of the Anio River. They were pushed back when they reached the Colline Gate and the City walls, but they managed to take a significant amount of people and livestock. Consul Servilius, despite his determined army, was unable to catch up with the main Sabine force in a field suitable for battle. However, he caused so much destruction that he returned with more plunder than the Sabines had taken.

In the war against the Volscians, the Romans did well thanks to the efforts of both the consul and the soldiers. They first fought a fierce battle on open ground, with the standards brought together, and with heavy casualties on both sides and a lot of blood. The Romans, due to their smaller numbers, would have retreated if the consul hadn't rallied them by shouting, falsely, that the enemy was retreating on the other wing. As the Romans believed they were winning, they charged and turned the tide of the battle, winning a victory for the Romans.

The consul, fearing that continuing to press too hard might renew the battle, signaled for a retreat. A few days of rest followed, during which a large number of people from all the Volscian and Aequian states came to the enemy camp, believing that the Romans would retreat in the night if they saw them. Around the third watch they came to attack the Roman camp.

Consul Quinctius, calming the confusion caused by the sudden alarm, ordered the soldiers to remain quietly in their tents. He then marched out a cohort of Hernician allies to an outpost. There, he ordered the horn-blowers and trumpeters to mount up on horseback and blow their instruments in front of the rampart at full volume all night, to keep the enemy on alert until daylight. Back at camp, the rest of the night was quiet, and the Roman soldiers had the advantage of a good night's sleep. On the Volscian side, it was anything but restful. The sight of armed infantry, whom they believed to be greater in number, kept them wide awake and in a perpetual state of readiness, as did the neighing and snorting of horses, aggravated at the loud noise in their ears and unusual weight of their riders.