**4.43** The following year Numerius Fabius Vibulanus and Titus Quinctius Capitolinus, son of Capitolinus, were consuls.

Consul Fabius, to whom the Aequian province fell by lot, didn't accomplish anything noteworthy. The dispirited Aequian army was routed out and immediately ran away in shame, without much honor to the consul, so a Triumph was denied. However, because he had erased the shame of Gaius Sempronius' defeat, he was allowed to enter the city with an ovation.

As the war had ended with less fighting than they had feared, the City, being calm during the conflict, erupted in unexpected conflicts between the plebeians and patricians, starting with the doubling of the number of quaestors. This measure, which was proposed by the consuls, stated that in addition to the two city quaestors, two more quaestors should assist the consuls with military duties.

When this proposal was offered to the Senate by the consuls, it received strong support. However, the plebeian tribunes insisted that half of the quaestors be chosen from the plebeians. Until then, only patricians were appointed. Both the consuls and the Senate initially resisted this idea, but eventually conceded that the plebeians should have equal say in the selection of quaestors, as they did in the election of consular tribunes. Ultimately, as nothing was to be gained by the consuls and the Senate doing this, they dropped the topic of increasing quaestors entirely.

The plebeian tribunes took up the issue, however, and other seditious plans were quickly being proposed, one after the other, including the Agrarian Law. Due to this commotion, since the Senate preferred to elect consuls rather than consular tribunes, and since the plebeian tribunes' protests prevented any Senate decree from being passed, the Republic transitioned from consular to an interregnum, but not without a significant struggle, as the plebeian tribunes vetoed any meeting of the patricians to appoint an interrex.

Much of the next year was consumed by conflicts between the new plebeian tribunes and several interreges, with the plebeian tribunes preventing the patricians from meeting to declare an interrex, and other times interrupting the interrex from calling the election of consuls.

Finally, Lucius Papirius Mugillanus, who was appointed as the interrex, criticized both the patricians and the plebeian tribunes, saying that the Republic had been abandoned and neglected by men and was sustained only by the providence and care of the gods who saved it from the Veiian truces and the Aequians' delay. If any threat arose, did we want the state to collapse for lack of patrician magistrates? Are we to have no army or a general to recruit one? Could we then fight a foreign war while still engaged in a civil one? If both occurred at the same time, the Roman state could barely be saved, even with the help of the gods.

Why not, then, compromise, meeting halfway to restore harmony? Let the patricians allow consular tribunes to be elected in place of consuls, and let the plebeian tribunes refrain from vetoing the election of four quaestors, to be chosen freely by the people from both the plebeians and patricians.