**6.24** As the battle began and the sound of clashing weapons filled the air, the enemy retreated, not out of fear, but as a stratagem. Behind the enemy forces was a gentle slope leading back to their camp. As they had plenty of soldiers, they left several strong cohorts there, armed and in formation. Once the Romans got close to the rampart of the camp, these soldiers would burst forth and attack.

The Romans, lured onto unfavorable ground by a reckless pursuit of retreating enemies, were vulnerable and walked right into the ambush. The Roman line began wavered as they began to panic, seeing the new enemy and the sloping valley. The fresh Volscians, who had launched the attack from the camp, rushed forward. Those who had pretended to retreat also rejoined the battle.

The Roman lines broke apart, forgetting their previous confidence and past victories. Then, instead of retreating orderly, they began to scatter in all directions, rushing towards back to camp in disarray. 

At this point, Camillus, helped onto his horse by those around him, quickly deployed the reserve troops, and said, "Is this the battle you asked for, soldiers? Who can you blame for this? Men? Gods? Your recklessness led to this, and now your cowardice. Having followed another leader, now follow Camillus! And conquer, just as you are accustomed to doing, under my leadership! Why are you looking back at the rampart and camp? None of you will return to that camp unless you're victorious!"

Initially, shame halted their chaotic retreat. Then, seeing the standards being turned around and the line turned to face the enemy, and seeing their general, distinguished by many triumphs and respected for his age, at the front of the battalions where the fighting was fiercest, each soldier began to reproach himself and others. Encouragement and loud cheers spread along the line. 

The other consular tribune, Lucius Furius, also did his part. Sent to the cavalry by Camillus, who was reorganizing the infantry line, he pleaded with them, not scolded them, as his own part in their failure had undermined his authority. He begged them, individually and collectively, to absolve him of blame for the day's events. "Despite my colleague's objections, I chose to share in everyone's recklessness rather than one man's caution. Camillus sees his own glory in your fate, whatever it may be. For me, unless the battle turns around, I'll share in your defeat, but I'll bear the shame alone, which is the hardest part." 

It was decided that the cavalry should dismount and join the still shaky line and fight on foot. Distinguished for their arms and bravery, they moved wherever the infantry line was under the most pressure. Neither officers nor soldiers held back from giving their best. As a result, their bravery made a difference. The Volscians, who had recently feigned retreat, were now truly fleeing. Many were killed in the battle and the subsequent flight, while others were captured in the camp, which was taken in the same attack. More were taken prisoner than killed.