**6.26** The enemy's submissive behavior led Camillus to order their senate to be summoned. "Tusculans," he said, "you're the only ones who have discovered the true weapons and strength to protect yourselves from the Romans' anger. Go to Rome and appear before the Senate. The senators will decide whether your past actions deserve more punishment, or a pardon for your present actions. I'll not expect any public gratitude.  From me, you'll have permission to plead your case. The Senate will grant your pleas as they see fit."

When the Tusculans arrived in Rome, they, who were once the most loyal allies until recently, were seen with sad faces in the vestibule of the Senate House. The senators, deeply moved, invited them in with a friendly rather than hostile manner. The Tusculan dictator then spoke: "Conscript Fathers, we, against whom you declared and waged war, are standing humbly in the vestibule of your Senate House, just as we once, armed and ready, came out to meet your generals and legions. This was our attire, and it'll always be unless we receive arms to defend you. We thank your generals and troops for trusting their eyes more than their ears and for not committing any acts of hostility where none were done to them. The peace which we have shown toward you, we ask of you in return. Please divert war to where it exists, if it exists anywhere. If we're to experience the effects of your arms after our surrender, we will experience it unarmed. This is our decision. May the immortal gods make it as fortunate as it is righteous. Regarding the accusations that led you to declare war against us, since facts speak louder than words and there is no point in contradicting them, we think it's safe to admit they were true, after showing clear signs of our remorse. Accept that we have wronged you, as you deserve the satisfaction of our honesty."

These were the Tusculans' words. They achieved peace at that time, and not long after, they also gained citizenship. The legions were withdrawn from Tusculum.