**6.28** Praeneste saw an opportunity, having seen that Rome hadn't raised an army, that it hadn't appointed anyone to be in command, and that the Senate and the plebeians had turned against each other. They quickly marched toward Rome, ravaging the countryside as they went, and advanced their forces to the Colline Gate. 

This caused significant panic in the City. The call to arms was sounded; people rushed to the walls and gates. Immediately, they shifted their focus from internal strife to external conflict, and appointed Titus Quinctius Cincinnatus as Dictator. He named Aulus Sempronius Atratinus as his Master of the Horse. Upon hearing this, the enemy retreated from the walls due to the fear associated with that office, and the young Romans assembled without resistance to answer the call.

While Rome was raising an army, the Praeneste army set up camp near the Allia River. From there, they destroyed the surrounding land and boasted that they had chosen a location that was fatal to Rome. They predicted a similar panic and retreat as had happened during the war with the Gauls. The Praenestines thought that if the Romans feared a day considered unlucky named after this place, how much more will they fear the Allia River itself, the memorial of such a great disaster.  Surely, the memory of the fierce appearance of the Gauls and the sound of their voices would haunt their sight and hearing. They based their hopes of victory on these unfounded beliefs about the location. 

In reality, the Romans knew that wherever a Latin enemy stood, they were the same enemy they had utterly defeated at Lake Regillus and kept in peaceful subjection for a hundred years. The memory of their defeat at that location motivated them to erase the memory of their disgrace, rather than instill fear that any particular location could be unfavorable to their victory. They were confident that even if the Gauls themselves appeared at that location, they would fight as they had fought in Rome to reclaim their nation, and as they had the day after, at Gabii. No enemy who breached the walls of Rome would return home to report either victory or defeat.