**6.29** Both sides arrived at the Allia River with different thoughts. Dictator Cincinnatus, upon seeing the enemy ready for battle, said, "Aulus Sempronius, notice how these men have positioned themselves at the Allia River, trusting in the luck of the location? The immortal gods haven't given them any stronger assurance or more effective support. Rely on weapons and bravery to launch a swift attack on the center of their line with the cavalry. I'll strike them with the legions when they're in disarray and scared. Be with us, gods, witnesses of the treaty. Exact the penalties due to you, who have been violated, and to us, who were deceived by people appealing to your divinity."

The Praenestines couldn't withstand the assault of the cavalry or infantry; their ranks were shattered at the first charge and shout. Then, when their line held no ground at any point, they turned their backs to flee. Being thrown into fear and running past their own camp in a panic, they didn't stop running until they saw Praeneste. There, having been scattered due to their flight, they chose a location to fortify hastily. They knew that if they retreated within the walls of Praeneste, the countryside would be set on fire immediately, and when all their land was destroyed, a siege would be laid to the city.

But when the victorious Romans approached, having looted the enemy's camp at the Allia River, the Praenestines abandoned their hastily built fortification and, scarcely believing their city walls were safe, they shut themselves within the town of Praeneste. There were eight other towns under the control of the Praenestines. The war was also brought to these towns; and these being captured one after the other without much difficulty, the Roman army was then led to Velitrae. This was also taken by storm. The Romans then arrived at Praeneste, the main cause of the war. That town was obtained, not by force, but by surrender. 

After his many victories in battle, now having also taken two enemy camps, and nine towns by storm, and Praeneste being obtained by surrender, Titus Quinctius returned to Rome. In his triumphal procession, he carried to the Capitoline Hill the statue of Jupiter Imperator, which he had transported from Praeneste. It was dedicated between the shrines of Jupiter and Minerva, and a plaque was fixed beneath it as a record of his achievements. It was inscribed with nearly these words: "Jupiter and all the gods granted that Titus Quinctius, Dictator, should capture nine towns." 

On the twentieth day after his appointment, he resigned the dictatorship.