**6.31** The start of the next year was immediately inflamed with civil unrest. The consular tribunes were Spurius Furius, Quintus Servilius Fidenas for the second time, Licinius Menenius Lanatus for the third time, Publius Cloelius Siculus, Marcus Horatius, and Lucius Geganius Macerinus. The root and cause of the upheaval was debt. To investigate this, Spurius Servilius Priscus and Quintus Cloelius Siculus were appointed as censors. However, they were unable to proceed due to war. 

At first, alarming reports were brought by messengers, followed by people fleeing from their lands, indicating that the Volscian legions had entered the Roman borders and were causing widespread destruction. This foreign threat didn't quell the internal disputes. Instead, the plebeian tribunes became even more obstructive in the recruitment process. This continued until the patricians agreed that no one would pay the war-tax during the war, and no legal action would be taken regarding money owed. Once these concessions were made to the plebeians, the recruitment process proceeded without delay.

New legions were formed, and it was decided that two armies would invade Volscian territory. Spurius Furius and Marcus Horatius marched on the right towards the seacoast and Antium, while Quintus Servilius and Lucius Geganius marched on the left towards the mountains and Ecetra. The enemy was not encountered on either side. And so, the Romans ravaged the countryside. The damage wasn't like the hasty raids made by the Volscians, who, fearing a Roman attack at any moment, quickly looted in a panic. Instead, the Romans stayed there, causing deliberate and systematic widespread destruction. And, while the Volscians stayed mostly in border areas out of fear that Rome would send an army, the Romans purposely lingered in the interior of enemy territory; they hoped to provoke a battle. There, they burned down all the houses, fields, and some villages, leaving no fruit trees or seeds or grain for future harvests that year. Taking all the loot, humans, and cattle that could be found outside the walled towns, the two armies then returned back to Rome.