**6.32** After only a short respite given to debtors to recover, once matters with the enemy had calmed down, legal proceedings resumed in full force. Instead of easing old debts, new debt was created through a tax for the construction of a wall built with squared stone, a project overseen by the censors. The plebeians had no choice but to accept this burden, as the plebeian tribunes had no draft they could obstruct.

The patricians even had enough influence among the plebeians to ensure that all the consular tribunes were elected from among them, including Lucius Aemilius Mamercinus, Publius Valerius Potitus Publicola for the fourth time, Gaius Veturius Crassus Cicurinus, Servius Sulpicius, Lucius Quinctius Cincinnatus for the third time and Gaius Quinctius Cincinnatus.

With the same influence, they managed to raise three armies against the Latins and Volscians, who had united their legions and were camped at Satricum. All eligible young men were bound by the military oath and nobody objected. One army was for the protection of the City; another was to be sent for sudden war emergencies if any disturbance should arise elsewhere. The third and most powerful army was led by Publius Valerius and Lucius Aemilius to Satricum.

Upon finding the enemy already in battle formation at Satricum, they immediately engaged. Although victory was not yet decisive, the battle, which held out a fair hope of success, was interrupted by rain and a violent windstorm. The battle was resumed the next day. For a considerable time, the Latin legions, who had been trained in Roman warfare during their long alliance, held their ground with equal bravery and success. However, when the Roman cavalry charged, it disrupted their ranks. While they were in disarray, the Roman infantry advanced more forcefully, driving the enemy back. Once the tide of battle turned toward the Romans, their forces quickly overwhelmed the enemy.

The defeated enemy was routed. Instead of retreating to their camp which was two miles away from Satricum, they fled. Most were cut down by the cavalry. Their camp was taken and plundered. The night following the battle, enemy survivors marched in a disorganized column resembling a retreat to Antium. Although the Roman army followed closely behind, the enemy's fear proved faster than the Romans' anger. As a result, the enemy entered the walls before the Romans could catch the rear of their column. After that, the Romans spent several days ravaging the country, as the Romans lacked the military engines to attack walls, and the enemy wasn't willing to risk a battle.