**7.2** Plague persisted for this year and the next, with Gaius Sulpicius Peticus and Gaius Licinius Stolo as consuls. That year, the only notable event was a lectisternium held to seek the gods' favor. This was the third time such an event had taken place since the City was built. Despite human efforts and divine intervention, the plague's severity didn't lessen.

In their desperation and superstition, the people turned to new methods to appease the gods, including the introduction of theatrical performances. This was a novel concept for a warrior society, as they had only ever had circus spectacles before. 

It started in a modest way, like the beginning of most things, and was imported from abroad.  Without any song and without acting with spoken words, the Etruscan dancers who were brought in to perform, danced to the music of the pipes and performed movements that were quite elegant in the Tuscan style. The City's young men began to mimic these performances, adding their own humorous comments in crude verse. Their gestures matched their words, and the performances were well-received and frequently performed.

The local performers were called histriones, a word which originally came from "ister", the Etruscan word for an actor. These actors didn't just recite random, unrefined, rude verses like the Fescennine Verses, but performed full melodies of metered, satirical verses, written for the flute. To these, they also added choreographed movement.

Years later, an actor named Livius Andronicus, who had previously performed these complex pieces of satire, became the first to present a story with a structured plot. Since he was the actor of his own songs, his voice was strained from frequently being called back for encores. He asked permission to let a boy stand in front of the musician to sing the melody so that he could perform the gestures. This allowed him to move more freely, as he wasn't hindered by singing. From that point on, this started the practice of performing to the singing of others, leaving only the dialogues to be spoken by the actors.

As the focus of these performances shifted from comedy and unrestrained jokes to a more refined art form, young men left the acting to the professional actors, the histriones.

Instead, they returned to their old tradition of tossing nonsense into funny, interwoven verses, which were then called exodia. These were mainly connected with the fables from the Atellan Farces. This form of entertainment, which they had adopted from the Oscans, was kept exclusive to the young men. They didn't allow it to be performed by professional actors. As a result, the actors of the Atellan Farces weren't considered paid actors, weren't removed from their tribes, and were allowed to serve in the army as if they had no association with the stage.

Amongst other things that start small, I felt it was important to first note the humble origins of theatrical plays, to show how they evolved from healthy beginnings into the extravagant madness of today, hardly tolerable even for wealthy kingdoms.