**7.5** These accusations against Lucius Manlius enraged everyone, except for the young man himself. In fact, he was upset that he was the cause of public hatred and charges against his father. He wanted everyone, gods and men, to know that he would rather help his father than his enemies. So, he made a plan that showed his rough and rural mindset. It wasn't a civilized example, but it was admirable for its devotion to his father. He secretly armed himself with a knife and went early in the morning to the City, directly to the house of Marcus Pomponius, the plebeian tribune. He told the doorman that he needed to see his master right away and asked him to announce that he was Titus Manlius, son of Lucius.

He was let in immediately, as they thought the young man would be angry at his father and had brought some new accusation or plan to deal with the matter. After greeting each other, he said that he had some private matters to discuss.

After everyone else was asked to leave, he pulled out his dagger. Standing over the bed with his dagger pointed at the plebeian tribune, he threatened to kill him right then and there unless he swore, in the words he would dictate, that he never would hold a meeting of the plebeians for the purpose of prosecuting his father. The tribune was scared, seeing the shining steel before his eyes, knowing that he was alone and unarmed. The other man was young, strong, and terrifyingly fierce in his physical strength. Accordingly, he swore, just as he was ordered, and later admitted that this act made him abandon his plan.

Even though the plebeians were upset that they wouldn't have the chance to vote against such a cruel and tyrannical offender, they were all the more impressed that the son had dared to act so bravely for his father. It was even more admirable that the father's harshness hadn't lessened the boy's love for him.

Therefore, not only was the father's trial waived, but the incident also brought honor to the young man. That year, it was decided for the first time that military tribunes for the legions would be elected by a vote of the people. Before that, the commanders used to appoint them, as they now do today, and they're called Rufuli. The young Titus Manlius got the second place among six, without any civil or military achievements to win public favor, as he had spent his youth in the countryside, away from the world.