**7.8** The struggle was thus fought between the best of both nations. Whatever casualties Mars took from either side, the loss was far greater than what was expected: the soldiers, armed for battle, seemed to have entrusted the fight to their leaders, basing their own success on the courage of others. Many were killed on both sides; even more were injured.

Eventually, the cavalry started criticizing each other, questioning what there was left to do. If they hadn't made a dent in the enemy while on horseback, nor as foot soldiers, had they accomplished anything significant? What third method of combat were they waiting for? Why had they so aggressively charged ahead of the line, and fought in a position not meant for them?

Stirred by these mutual rebukes, they renewed their battle cry and pushed forward; first, they caused the enemy to take a step back, then pushed them back, and at last the enemy finally turned and ran. It's difficult to pinpoint what factor tipped the scales in such an evenly matched strength; perhaps the consistent luck of both peoples might have either boosted or dampened their morale.

The Romans chased the fleeing Hernicians to their camp; they refrained from attacking the camp due to the late hour. Dictator Servilius was delayed in giving the signal to attack because the sacrifices hadn't been completed successfully, which extended the battle into the night.

The next day, the Hernicians' camp was found abandoned, with some injured men left behind in their deserted flight. A line of the fleeing Hernicians was attacked by the people of Signia, as their standards were spotted passing by their walls. The Signians chased them, and they were scattered across the countryside in hasty retreat.

The victory wasn't without cost to the Romans. A quarter of the soldiers were killed and, in a similar vein of loss, several Roman cavalrymen fell.