**2.28** Next, Aulus Verginius and Titus Vetusius became consuls.

The plebeians, unsure of what kind of leaders they would be, started holding secret meetings at night. Some met on the Esquiline Hill, others on the Aventine Hill. They did this to avoid making rushed decisions and pronouncements in the Forum. The consuls saw this as a dangerous act, as it was, and made a formal report to the Senate.

Any hope for rational discussion was crushed as the Senate degenerated into shouting, indignant about having to deal with an unsavory issue that, in their minds, the consuls should have already handled by now. They already had the power to resolve it, so what was the problem. If there were real leadership in the Republic, they said, there would only be one single council in Rome and no meetings beyond that. Now the Republic is divided into a thousand little councils and assemblies, some on the Esquiline Hill, others on the Aventine Hill. They thought that a man like Appius Claudius, for he was stronger than any consul, would have easily broken up these private meetings. The consuls, now having been publicly reprimanded, continued to ask the senators what they should do. They wanted to give the issue the attention and energy that the senators wanted. Accordingly, the Senate passed a decree to start the draft as quickly and vigorously as possible, as the plebeians were becoming unruly due to lack of work.

After the meeting, the consuls ascended the tribunal and summoned the young men of Rome who would be drafted, by their names. No one responded. Instead, the plebeians gathered around the consuls and said they wouldn't fight until the government kept its promises. They wanted their rights restored so that they were fighting for their nation and their fellow citizens, not for tyrannical leaders. The consuls understood the Senate's decree to begin the draft, but none of the senators who had spoken so boldly in the Senate were there to help them deal with the public's anger. The consuls felt a fierce battle with the plebeians was imminent. Therefore, before they tried the last resort, the consuls decided to return to the Senate and consult them a second time. This time, the younger senators rushed from their seats to confront the consuls, telling them to resign if they could not handle their duties.