**2.30** The reaction was mixed. Many senators thought Appius Claudius' motion was cruel and monstrous, which it actually was. On the other hand, the views of Publius Verginius and Titus Largius were seen as risky because of the precedent they set. Largius' opinion was particularly concerning because it would destroy trust. Verginius' opinion was considered the most balanced, a good middle ground between the other two. However, due to political divisions and personal interests, which have interfered and will always interfere with public policy, Appius' view ultimately won out. He was very close to being made dictator, himself. This move would have alienated the plebeians at a time when the Volscians, Aequians, and Sabines were all in arms together. However, the consuls and older senators ensured that the powerful position of dictator was given to a moderate man, Manius Valerius, the son of Volesus Valerius.

The plebeians, even though they knew this official was chosen against their interests, were also not afraid of him or his family. They knew they had the right to appeal under the very same laws that were passed by his brother, Publius Valerius Publicola. An edict from Dictator Valerius followed, like one issued by Consul Servilius, which reassured them. The plebeians now felt as if they could trust the man and the authority of his position, so they stopped protesting and enlisted in the army. Ten legions were formed, the largest army ever. Each consul led three legions, and Dictator Valerius led four. The war could not be delayed any longer.

The Aequi had invaded Latin territory, and the Latin envoys asked the Senate to either send reinforcements or permission to arm themselves to defend their borders. The Senate decided it was safer to defend the Latins without arming them, so Consul Vetusius and his legions were sent to help. This stopped the raids and the Aequi retreated from the plains to the highest ridges of the mountains, relying on the terrain rather than their weapons to protect them.

The other Consul, Verginius, advanced against the Volscians. To speed up the process, he ransacked their fields with the idea of forcing them to move their camp nearer to his and bring on a battle. In the middle of the field between the two camps the two men stood in front of their respective ramparts, with their standards and their army behind them. The Volscians had considerably more soldiers and, accordingly, showed their contempt for their foe by charging recklessly into battle toward the Romans. However, the Roman consul ordered his army motionless and forbade them from shouting any battle cries. He ordered them to stand with their javelins planted in the ground and, when the enemy came within close range, to spring forward and attack at full force with their swords.

The Volscians finally arrived at the Roman lines, now tired with their running and their shouting, and tried to attack, thinking that the Romans were frozen with fear. However, when they felt the strength of the counterattack and saw the swords flashing before them, they retreated in confusion just as if they had been caught in an ambush. As they had been running so fast and so carelessly into battle, they didn't have the strength to flee. The Romans, on the other hand, since the beginning of the battle they had remained quietly standing, were fresh and vigorous. They easily overtook the exhausted Volscians, took their camp, and pursued them all the way to Velitrae, the victors and the vanquished bursting headfirst into the city. More blood was shed in the indiscriminate slaughter in the city than in the battle, with only a few spared after they threw down their weapons and surrendered.