**2.31** While events were unfolding among the Volscians, Dictator Valerius and his legions entered Sabine territory where the most serious part of the war was happening. There, he defeated and chased the Sabines out of their camp. The Dictator used his cavalry to disrupt the enemy's center line, as it was weak due to the line's flanks being overextended. The infantry attacked in this scattered chaos, capturing their camp and ending the war in one move. This battle was the most notable of its time, second only to the Battle of Lake Regillus.

Dictator Valerius was celebrated with a Triumph upon his return to the City. In addition to the usual honors, he and his descendants were given a special place in the Circus Maximus to watch the public games, and a ceremonial curule chair was placed there.

The lands of Velitrae were taken from the defeated Volscians and colonists from the City were sent to establish a colony there.

Soon after, there was a clash with the Aequians. Consul Veturius was reluctant to pursue this battle because the mountainous terrain was dangerous, but the soldiers, suspicious, believed that the war was being deliberately prolonged so that the Dictator's term of office would expire before they returned home and, as before, his promises wouldn't be carried out. They pressured Veturius to act and so he recklessly led the army uphill into enemy territory.

This risky move was successful only due to the enemy's cowardice. Before the Romans came within javelin range, the Aequians, astonished at the audacity of the Romans, abandoned their camp and their strongly fortified positions on the mountain, descended down the other side and fled into the valley below. The Romans found plenty of spoils in the camp, and victory was achieved without bloodshed.

Despite three military successes, both the senators and the plebeians were still anxious about their internal conflicts. The creditors possessed such influence and had maneuvered so skillfully that they rendered the people and even the Dictator, himself, powerless. After Consul Veturius had returned, Dictator Valerius introduced a proposal as the very first business of the Senate, and on behalf of the debtor soldiers who had brought victory to Rome. He asked that they decide about how Rome would handle these debtors. His proposal was rejected.

The Dictator responded to the Senate, "To you all, I'm not acceptable as an advocate of peace. Rest assured that you'll soon wish that the Roman plebeians had champions like me. As far as I'm concerned, I'll no longer encourage my fellow citizens in their hope. Nor will I be a dictator in vain. Internal dissensions and foreign wars have made this office necessary to the City. Peace has now been secured abroad, but, at home, it has been made impossible. I'd rather witness this mutiny as a private citizen than as Dictator." After these words, Marcus Valerius resigned his dictatorship and left the Senate.

The plebeians understood the reason why he resigned and his indignation at not being able to help. And so, as if he had fulfilled his promises, even though it wasn't his fault he was blocked, they followed him home with admiration and praise.