**7.39** Consul Marcius, after leading his army into summer quarters, while the Samnites remained quiet, decided to cleanse his army by discharging disruptive soldiers. Some were honorably discharged. Others were told that they were too old and weak. Still, others were given temporary leave, at first individually, then by whole cohorts, under the excuse that they spent the winter far from home and needed to attend to their personal affairs. Under the guise of various military errands, more and more soldiers were sent off strategically. 

Once in Rome, Consul Servilius and the praetor kept these soldiers by inventing excuses after another, detaining them inside the City. At first, they were delighted and returned home without hesitation. However, they then realized that those who were first sent home didn't return to their ranks, and that only those who wintered in Campania, especially the instigators of the mutiny, were being sent away. The soldiers were first shocked, then they began to fear that their plans had been exposed. They worried about facing trials, that evidence was being collected, that some would be executed, and that the brutal power of the consuls and the Senate would be turned against them. The remaining soldiers in the camp discussed these concerns quietly, and some realized that the core conspirators had been cleverly dismantled by the Consul.

One cohort, not far from Anxur, positioned themselves at Lautulae, a narrow, forested pass between the sea and the mountains, to intercept those whom the Consul was dismissing under various pretexts. Their group was growing in strength and was almost a full-fledged army, lacking only a commander. Though disorganized, they moved into the Alban territory, plundering as they went, and set up a camp encircled by a rampart under the hill of Alba Longa. After completing their work, they spent the rest of the day debating who to choose as their commander, as they didn't trust anyone present. They wondered whom they could invite from Rome and which of the patricians or plebeians would willingly risk such danger or could be trusted with the cause of the disgruntled army.

The next day, as they continued to deliberate, some of the plundering soldiers brought back information that Titus Quinctius was living on a farm in the Tusculan territory, oblivious to the City and honors.  This man was a patrician, and when he became unable to walk from a foot injury he received at the end of a campaign carried out with great glory, he decided to retire from his illustrious military career and lead a life in the country far from ambition and the Forum. When they heard his name, they immediately recognized the man and ordered him to be summoned, hoping for a favorable outcome.  Although they doubted he would come willingly, they planned to use force and threats if necessary.

So, in the silence of the night, the soldiers sent to fetch him entered his house and found Quinctius fast asleep. They woke him and told him he could not escape; he had no choice but to accept command and honor or face death if he resisted. They forced him to go to the camp, where he was immediately hailed as the general. While he was still shocked and terrified by the sudden turn of events, they gave him the symbols of honor and ordered him to lead them to Rome. They then uprooted their standard and, driven more by their own fervor than by their general's orders, they marched toward the City until they reached the eighth stone on what is now called the Appian Way.

They would have gone straight to the City immediately if they hadn't heard that Marcus Valerius Corvus as Dictator and Lucius Aemilius Mamercinus as the Master of the Horse were coming to fight against them.