**7.40** As soon as they came within sight of each other and recognized each other's arms and standards, a wave of emotions hit them. Memories of home cooled their anger. They weren't yet brave enough to spill the blood of their fellow countrymen; they had only known wars with foreign nations. The worst insanity of all was to secede from one's own people. Immediately, both the generals and the soldiers on both sides sought meetings to discuss the next steps.

Titus Quinctius, who was tired of fighting even in defense of his country, let alone against it, and Dictator Corvus, who had a deep love for all his countrymen, especially the soldiers, and most of all for his own army, each stepped forward. As soon as Corvus was recognized, he was granted silence with as much respect from his opponents as from his own side as he spoke:

"Soldiers, when I left the city, I prayed to the immortal gods, your gods as well as mine, and begged them to let me bring peace among you, not victory over you. There have been and will be plenty of chances to earn military glory. This time, we should aim for peace. What I asked the gods for in my prayers, you can give me, if you remember that your camp isn't in Samnium, or among the Volscians, but on Roman soil. Those hills which you see belong to your country and this is the army of your fellow countrymen. I am your consul, under whose leadership and auspices you twice defeated the Samnite legions last year, and twice stormed their camp."

"You recognize me by the kindness I have shown to you, not cruelty. I have never proposed a tyrannical law against you, nor a harsh Senate decree. I have always been stricter with myself than with you. And if birth, merit, high rank, or public honors could make anyone arrogant, I could have been. I come from such ancestors. I've shown my merit. I became consul at such a young age, that at twenty-three I could have been a proud consul, even to the patricians, not just to the plebeians. What act or word of mine, when I was consul, have you heard that was harsher than when I was only a tribune? I ran two consecutive consulships the same way and I'll run this dictatorship the same way, as well. So I'll be no more lenient with these, my own soldiers and my country, than with you, whom I shudder to call its enemies. You'll have to draw your swords against me before I draw mine against you. The signal and the shout will come from your side first. You begin the charge, if a battle must happen."

Are you really prepared to do something that neither your fathers nor grandfathers did? Neither those who withdrew to the Sacred Mount, nor those who later positioned themselves on the Aventine Hill did what you are proposing. Will you wait until your mothers and wives come out from the city to meet you with their hair loose, as they did once to Coriolanus? At that time, the Volscians had a Roman for their leader, and they stopped fighting. Would you go further than they did in an unholy war against your own people?"

"Titus Quinctius, whatever your situation is on that side, whether you're there willingly or unwillingly, if there must be fighting, then you should retreat to the back. It'll be more honorable for you to flee and turn your back on your fellow countryman, than to fight against your country. Today, you have the chance to the be among the first to make peace with dignity and honor; and may you be the mediator of this beneficial discussion. Ask for what is fair. In fact, even if it is not fair, we would rather accept those terms than fight in an unholy civil war against each other." 

Titus Quinctius, turning to his men with tears in his eyes, said:

"Soldiers, if I can be of any use, you have a better leader in me for peace than for war. That speech just now wasn't made by a Volscian, or a Samnite, but a Roman: your own consul, your own general. You have been led to victory under his command and his auspices; don't try to experience these against yourselves."

"The Senate has other generals who will fight you with more hostility. Instead, they chose the one who would be most likely to spare you, his own soldiers, and in whom you would have the most trust. Even those who can win want peace: what should we want? Let us set our anger aside as well as any false leaders. Why not entrust ourselves and all our concerns to a good man of faith whom we all know?"