**9.11** Pontius then declared, "I shall not accept such a surrender, nor will the Samnites consider it valid. Come now, Spurius Postumius. If you believe in the gods, why don't you reject the entire negotiation, or stand by your agreement? The Samnite nation is entitled to all the men it had in its power, or peace instead of them."

"But why am I appealing to you, who is giving up himself as a prisoner as honorably as he can? I appeal to the Roman people. If they're unhappy with the pledge made at the Caudine Forks, let them return the legions to the passage where they were trapped. Let there be no deception on either side; let's forget it ever happened. Let them take back the arms they surrendered by the agreement. Let them return to their camp. Whatever they possessed the day before the negotiations, let them possess these again. Then let them discuss war and make courageous decisions; let the pledge and peace be rejected."

"Let's continue the war in the same circumstances and situations as before peace was ever discussed. Let neither the Roman people blame the consuls' agreement, nor we the faith of the Roman people."

"Will there never be an end to your excuses for not honoring agreements made when you're defeated? You gave hostages to Porsena, then you secretly stole them back. You ransomed your City from the Gauls for gold, then killed them while they were receiving it. You made peace with us on the condition that we release your captured legions, you now make that peace null and void. And you always cover your deception with some pretense of a legal right."

"Do the Roman people not approve of a peace that saved its legions at the cost of disgrace? Then let them keep their peace and return the legions captured by the victor. That would be conduct worthy of faith, treaties, and the sacred ceremonies of the fetials. But that you should get what you wanted from the agreement, which is the safety of so many of your countrymen. While I don't get the peace that I agreed to by sending them back to  you, is this the law that you, Aulus Cornelius, and you, fetials, consider just according to the law of nations?"

"I, however, neither accept those men whom you hand over under false pretenses, nor consider them truly surrendered; nor do I prevent them from returning to their own country, though it's bound by a pledge made while all the gods, whose divine authority is being mocked, are now enraged."

"Wage war, then, since Spurius Postumius has just now struck the ambassador with his knee. The gods are to believe that Postumius is a Samnite citizen, not a Roman citizen; and that a Roman ambassador has been violated by a Samnite; therefore, making a war against us just."

"Aren't you ashamed to bring this mockery of religion into broad daylight? For old men and former consuls to invent such excuses for breaking their word, which even children would see right through?"

"Go, lictor, remove the bonds from those Romans. Let no one delay them from leaving when they wish."

As a result, they returned unharmed from Caudium to the Roman camp, their personal obligations and possibly those of Rome having been discharged.