**9.7** Such were the opinions that were spoken and heard, and hope for the Roman name was mourned in this assembly of Rome's loyal allies.

Aulus Calavius, son of Ovius, a man of high standing due to his birth and conduct, and now even more respected because of his age, is said to have expressed a very different opinion. Stubborn silence, the eyes fixed on the ground, the ears deaf to all comfort, and the shame of seeing the light – these were signs of a mind preparing for the great acts of revenge.

Either he didn't understand the character of the Romans, he said, or that same silence would soon be drawing out cries and groans of anguish from the Samnites. The memory of the Caudine peace would be much more painful for the Samnites than for the Romans. Each side would show their true nature wherever they fought, but the Samnites wouldn't always have the advantage of the Caudine Forks.

By this point, the shameful catastrophe was notorious in Rome. Initially, they had received news that the troops were trapped. Yet the news of a shameful peace caused more distress than the original danger had. Before, when they had heard that the troops were surrounded, they began to recruit more men. When they learned that the army had surrendered in such a shameful way, they stopped preparations. Without any official orders, a widespread mourning took place, with various expressions of grief. The shops around the Forum were closed, and the courts and all business in the Forum stopped voluntarily before it was officially announced. Purple striped togas and gold rings of office were put away.

The public was sadder, if possible, than the army itself. They weren't only furious with the commanders, the advisors, and the guarantors of the peace, but they also despised the innocent soldiers, openly declaring to refuse to let them into the city or under their roofs. 

Once the soldiers arrived, the outbursts of anger were calmed. Their pitiful condition evoked sympathy even from angry citizens. They entered the city not like men returning back to their homeland safely, but looking and dressed like captives. They arrived late in the evening and hid in their homes so well that, for the next several days, none of them could bear to be seen in the Forum or in public.

The consuls, secluded in private, conducted no official business, except for what was forced upon them by a decree of the Senate to appoint a dictator to oversee the elections. They appointed Quintus Fabius Ambustus as Dictator and Publius Aelius Paetus as Master of the Horse. However, because they were improperly appointed, Marcus Aemilius Papus was substituted as Dictator with Lucius Valerius Flaccus as Master of the Horse. But these men didn't hold the elections either.

And since all were disgusted with the magistrates of that year, it led to an interregnum. The interreges were Quintus Fabius Maximus and Marcus Valerius Corvus, who elected as consuls, Quintus Publilius Philo for the third time, and Lucius Papirius Cursor for the second time. This choice was universally approved, as there were no commanders more renowned at that time.