**9.8** On the very day they were elected, they assumed their roles, as the Senate had decided. After the usual religious acts and standard Senate decrees were passed, they brought up the topic of the peace of Caudine.

Consul Publilius, who then held the fasces, said, "Spurius Postumius, speak."

Postumius stood up, his face as serious as when he had walked under the yoke, and spoke:

"Consuls, I know that I've been called to speak first not as an honor, but as a disgrace. I'm asked to speak not as a senator, but as a defendant on trial, partly for an unlucky war and partly for a shameful peace. However, since you aren't asking about our guilt or punishment, I'll set aside my defense, which would not be difficult before men who understand the fortunes of men and their necessities. Instead, I'll briefly share my thoughts on the matter you have raised."

"My opinion will show whether I was trying to save myself or your legions when I agreed to the pledge, and whether it was shameful or necessary. The Roman people aren't bound by this agreement, as it was made without their approval. The only thing the Samnites can claim is our bodies. Let us be handed over to them by the fetials, naked and in chains. Let's free the people from any religious obligation. This way, there will be no divine or human obstacle preventing you from starting this just and righteous war again."

"Meanwhile, I advise the consuls to recruit, arm, and lead the army. However, they shouldn't enter enemy territory until all the necessary conditions for our surrender are fully carried out. I pray to the immortal gods that, even though Spurius Postumius and Titus Veturius weren't successful as consuls in the war against the Samnites, they will find it enough to have seen us sent under the yoke, bound by a shameful agreement, and handed over to our enemies, naked and chained, and receiving the full force of the enemy's anger upon our heads. I hope that the new consuls and legions of Rome will wage war against the Samnites in the same way and with the same success as were waged before we became consuls." 

After he finished speaking, the people were filled with both admiration and pity for the man that they could hardly believe that this was the same Spurius Postumius who had agreed to such a shameful peace. Now they pitied him that such a man of such character was likely to suffer the most severe punishment from the enemy for their anger at a broken peace.

When all the members praised him and supported his motion, Lucius Livius and Quintus Maelius, plebeian tribunes, objected. They said that the people wouldn't be freed from the religious obligation by simply surrendering the consuls unless everything taken at Caudium by the Samnites was returned – arms, equipment, and everything else. They also argued that the consuls didn't deserve punishment for saving the Roman army by agreeing to the peace. Finally, that because consuls were sacred and inviolable, they cannot be handed over to the enemy nor harmed.