**9.9** Postumius responded, "Surrender us as unsanctified individuals, which you can do without offending religious principles. Later, you can hand over those who are sacred and inviolable, once they leave office. However, if you heed my advice, before they are surrendered, they'll first be punished with rods here in the Comitium. This will serve as an installment on their punishment. As for their claim that the people aren't absolved of their religious obligation by our surrender, they say that more to prevent their own surrender than because it's actually true. Who is so ignorant of the fetials' laws not to know that?"

"I don't deny, senators, that pledges and treaties are sacred to people who value divine religion and trust between men as much as duties to the gods. But I maintain that nothing can bind the people without the approval of the people themselves. Imagine if the Samnites, with the same arrogance they used to force us into this agreement, had made us recite the formal words for surrendering our cities. Would you tribunes say that the Roman people were surrendered? That this city, these temples, its shrines, its borders, and its waters, were now the property of the Samnites?"

"I'll pass over the issue of surrender, as the pledge is the main issue. Suppose we had pledged that the Roman people would abandon this city? Or they could set it on fire? Or they would have no magistrates, no Senate, no laws, and be ruled by kings in the future? May the gods forbid! But the indignity of the terms doesn't lessen the obligation of a pledge. If a commitment can bind the people in one case, they can be bound by all cases. It doesn't matter whether it was a consul, a dictator, or a praetor who made the pledge. This was proven by the Samnites themselves, who weren't satisfied with the consuls' pledge as they forced the legates, quaestors, and military tribunes to pledge. Therefore, don't ask me why I entered into such an agreement when it was neither within the consul's authority nor was it proper to promise them a peace which was not in my control, nor could I pledge on your behalf, when you hadn't given me any power to do so."

"Senators, none of the events at Caudium were guided by human wisdom. The immortal gods deprived both your generals and those of the enemy of sound judgement. We didn't act with enough caution in the war, and they squandered a victory they had won through our folly. They were so insecure about their victory that they even mistrusted the ground that helped them win and were eager, on any terms, to take arms away from men born to bear arms."

"If they had been thinking clearly, would it have been difficult for them, while waiting for the elders summoned from home for advice, to send ambassadors to Rome, and negotiate a peace and treaty with the Senate and the people of Rome? It would have been a journey of only three days for fast travelers. In the meantime, a truce could have been established until their ambassadors brought back either certain victory or peace ratified by the people of Rome. Only then would it finally be the pledge we would make, as decreed by the people."

"But you wouldn't have granted such an order, nor would we have pledged it. Nor was it right that the matter should end with anything other than they were being vainly deluded by a dream too joyful for their minds to grasp, and that our army should be freed by the same fortune that had trapped it. Their empty victory would be undone by an even more empty peace, with a pledge that bound no one but the person who pledged it. For what part did you senators play and what part did the Roman people play in this? Who can say that they appealed to you or that you deceived them? Can the enemy or a citizen? You pledged nothing to the enemy. You ordered no citizen to pledge on your behalf."

"Therefore, you have no connection with us, to whom you gave no commission, nor with the Samnites, with whom you conducted no business. We're guarantors to the Samnites, rich enough in what is ours, in what we can offer, our bodies and our minds. Let them vent their cruelty on us, let them sharpen their resentment and their swords against us. As for the tribunes, consider whether they can be handed over now or if it must wait for another day. In the meantime, let us, Titus Veturius and the others involved, offer our worthless lives to fulfill the guarantee, and by our punishment free the Roman army."