**6.35** The moment seemed ripe for political change due to the plebeians' massive debt burden. They couldn't hope for relief unless other plebeians held the highest offices, so they believed the time was right to strive for this goal. By their efforts and persistence, the plebeians had already made some progress such that, if they continued their struggle, they could reach the top and be equal to the patricians in both honor and merit.

Gaius Licinius Stolo and Lucius Sextius were elected as plebeian tribunes, a position that could pave the way for other honors.  Once elected, they proposed laws that were against the wealth of the patricians and in favor of the interests of the plebeians. One law was about the debt, suggesting that whatever had been paid in interest should be deducted from the principal, and the remainder should be paid off in three years in equal installments. Another law proposed a limit on land ownership, stating that no one could own more than five hundred jugera of land. A third law prohibited the election of consular tribunes, and that at least one of the two consuls should be elected from the plebeians.

These were all significant issues that couldn't be achieved without a great struggle. With such high competition for the three things which are always excessively desired by people: land, money, and honors, the patricians became frightened and dismayed by this. In their public and private discussions, they could find no other solution except a tactic they had used in many previous conflicts: the veto. They persuaded the colleagues of Licinius and Sextius to block the plebeian tribunes' bills. 

When they saw the tribes summoned to vote by Licinius and Sextius, the plebeian tribunes' colleagues, surrounded by the patricians' guards, didn't allow the bills to be read or any other usual procedure for taking the votes of the plebeians to be carried out. After several unsuccessful assemblies, the proposals continued to be rejected.

Finally, Sextius said, "Very well, since it's decided that a veto has so much power, we will use the same weapon to protect the plebeians. Come, patricians, call an assembly for the election of consular tribunes. I'll make sure that the phrase, 'Veto!' \["I forbid!"\], which you enjoy hearing our colleagues chant, won't help you."

His threats weren't empty: no elections were held, except for aediles and plebeian tribunes. Gaius Licinius Stolo and Lucius Sextius, re-elected as plebeian tribunes, didn't allow any curule magistrates to be appointed. This complete absence of magistrates continued in the City for five years, with the people re-electing the same two plebeian tribunes who, in turn, prevented the election of consular tribunes.