**6.36** There was a timely pause in other conflicts. The colonists of Velitrae, growing bold since there was no Roman army present, invaded Roman territory several times. They even attempted a siege on Tusculum. The Tusculans, long-time allies and recent fellow citizens, pleaded for help from Rome. This plea moved not only the patricians, but also the plebeians, primarily out of a sense of honor.

The plebeian tribunes eased their resistance, and elections were held for consular tribunes by the interrex. Elected were Lucius Furius Medullinus for the second time, Aulus Manlius Capitolinus for the fifth time, Servius Sulpicius Praetextatus for the third time, Servius Cornelius Maluginensis for the sixth time, Publius Valerius Potitus Publicola for the fifth time and Gaius Valerius Potitus.

The new consular tribunes found the plebeians less cooperative in the draft than in the elections. Despite significant contention, an army was raised. They not only drove the enemy from Tusculum but also forced them back to within their own walls. Velitrae was then besieged by a force far greater than that which had besieged Tusculum. However, Velitrae couldn't be captured before new consular tribunes were elected the next year.

The new consular tribunes elected were Quintius Servilius Fidenas for the third time, Gaius Veturius Crassus Cicurinus for the second time, Aulus Cornelius Cossus and Marcus Cornelius Maluginensis, Quintus Quinctius Cincinnatus, and Marcus Fabius Ambustus for the second time. These tribunes didn't achieve anything noteworthy at Velitrae either.

Back home, the situation was more critical. In addition to Lucius Sextius and Gaius Licinius, the proposers of the laws who were re-elected plebeian tribunes for the eighth time, Marcus Fabius Ambustus, a consular tribune and father-in-law of Gaius Licinius Stolo, became a strong supporter as well.

Initially, eight of the original plebeian tribunes vetoed the proposed laws, but now only five of those remained to veto. And as is usually the case with those who desert their own party, these five were already embarrassed and dismayed, defending their position by the arguments privately suggested to them by the patricians. Pretending to intercede, they repeated the same excuse that they were told to use; that many of the plebeians were absent, fighting with the army at Velitrae, and that the elections should be postponed until the soldiers returned so that all the plebeians could vote on matters affecting their own interests. 

Sextius, Licinius, some of their colleagues, and Fabius Ambustus, one of the consular tribunes, had become skilled at influencing the plebeians over many years and were tiring the leading patricians by questioning them about every detail on each of the topics that were about to be presented to the people: 

Would patricians, they asked, dare to demand that, when two jugera of land per person were distributed among the plebeians, they themselves should be allowed to have more than five hundred jugera of land? Would be they dare to demand that each of them should be allowed to possess enough land to support nearly three hundred citizens, while the plebeian's portion of land barely provided him a roof for shelter and a burial place?

Would it be acceptable that the plebeians, trapped by interest, should surrender their bodies for chains and punishments rather than pay the principal? And every day, did they want men led away in chains from the Forum in droves, adjudged as debtors and assigned to their creditors as bondslaves? 

Should the houses of the patricians be filled with prisoners in chains so that, wherever a patrician lived, so too should there be his own private dungeon?