**6.38** The year ended before the legions returned from Velitrae. As a result, the discussion about the proposed laws was put on hold and postponed for the newly elected consular tribunes. The plebeians re-elected the same plebeian tribunes, including the two who had originally proposed the laws. The newly elected consular tribunes were Titus Quinctius Cincinnatus, Servius Cornelius Maluginensis for the seventh time, Servius Sulpicius Praetextatus for the fourth time, Spurius Servilius Structus, Lucius Papirius Crassus, and Lucius Veturius Crassus Cicurinus. 

At the start of the new year, the final debate about the laws escalated. When the tribes were called to vote, and the plebeian tribunes' colleagues were no longer a hindrance with their veto, the patricians, feeling threatened, turned to their two final resources: the highest authority of the state and the authority of the individual citizen. It was decided that a dictator should be appointed. Marcus Furius Camillus was chosen, and he selected Lucius Aemilius as his Master of the Horse.

In response to this powerful move by their opponents, the proposers of the laws, armed with the cause of the plebeians and with great determination against such a large array of adversaries, called an assembly of the people and asked the tribes to vote.

When Dictator Camillus took his seat, surrounded by a group of patricians full of anger and threats, the usual skirmish started between the plebeian tribunes who were bringing the law to the people and the plebeian tribunes who were vetoing it. Although the veto was legally stronger, it was overpowered by the popularity of the laws and their proposers. The first tribes had already voted "aye" when Camillus interjected:

"Quirites, since you're swayed by the lawlessness, not authority, of the plebeian tribunes, you're now overturning the power of the veto, once won by the secession of the plebeians, by the same violent conduct by which you acquired it. I, as Dictator, will support the veto, not for the sake of the republic as a whole, but for your sake; and by my authority I'll defend your rights of protection, which you are destroying."

He added, "If Gaius Licinius and Lucius Sextius submit to the veto of their colleagues, I shall not introduce a patrician magistrate into the assembly of the plebeians. However, if they strive to impose their laws on the state as if the state had been conquered, I'll not allow the tribune power to be destroyed by its own hand."

Despite Camillus' threats, the plebeian tribunes continued to push for the laws with unyielding energy. Camillus, growing increasingly frustrated, sent his lictors to disperse the plebeians out of the assembly and threatened, if they persisted, he would immediately compel all young men by oath into military service and lead the army out of the City at once. His threats terrified the plebeians but only served to fuel the determination of their leaders rather than subdue it.

Unable to resolve the situation, Camillus resigned from his dictatorship. Some say he was appointed improperly, while others believe he stepped down because the plebeian tribunes had proposed a bill to the plebeians, and the plebeians passed it, that if Marcus Furius Camillus did anything as Dictator, he should be fined five hundred thousand aes rude, which would be a lot for him.

However, considering the man's character, it seems more likely to me that he was deterred by a flaw in the auspices rather than this unprecedented fine. Also, Publius Manlius Capitolinus was immediately appointed as Dictator in his place.  Why would they appoint Manlius to manage a contest in which Camillus had already been defeated?

Furthermore, the following year saw Marcus Furius Camillus was again appointed dictator, which he certainly wouldn't have accepted without shame if he had been defeated the previous year. At the time when the motion about fining him is said to have been passed, he could have opposed it at the time it was proposed or he could have prevented the reasons for which it was enacted. Finally, through the struggles that have occurred between the tribunes and the consuls, even up to the times which we ourselves can remember, the office of dictator has always stood above them all.