**6.39** Between the Camillus' dictatorship ending and before Manlius began as Dictator, a meeting of the plebeians was held, almost like an interregnum, in which it became clear which of the proposed laws were beneficial to the plebeians and which were merely beneficial to those who proposed them. The plebeians approved the bills about debt interest and land but rejected the one about the plebeian consul. Both decisions would have been implemented if the plebeian tribunes hadn't said that they were consulting the plebeians on all three bills as a set.

Dictator Manlius then tipped the balance in favor of the plebeians by naming Gaius Licinius Stolo, a plebeian and who had been military tribune, his Master of the Horse. The patricians, I understand, were very unhappy with this appointment, but the Dictator justified his decision to the Senate by citing his close relationship with Licinius. He also denied that the position of Master of the Horse was more powerful than that of consular tribune.

When the elections for plebeian tribunes were announced, Licinius and Sextius acted as if they didn't want the honor. However, they presented such a firm case for themselves that the plebeians gave them what they pretended not to want. They said they had now been standing for nine years, as if on a battlefield against the patricians, at great personal risk without any public benefit. The proposed laws and the full power of the plebeian tribune authority had aged with them and grown old. Their proposals were first attacked by the veto of their colleagues, then by the draft of their young people to the war at Velitrae, and finally by the Dictator's thunderbolt aimed against them. Now, neither their colleagues, nor the war, nor the dictator could stand in their way.

The Dictator, they said, by appointing a plebeian as Master of the Horse, had given a favorable omen for a plebeian consul. It would be the plebeians themselves barring their own way forward. The plebeians could, if they wanted, free the City and Forum from creditors and immediately free the lands from unjust possessors. When would the plebeians ever properly appreciate these gifts with a grateful heart if, while receiving laws for their own benefits, they deprived the proposers of these laws of any hope of honor? It wasn't worthy of the Roman people to demand relief from debt and to possess land unjustly occupied by the powerful, while leaving the old plebeian tribunes who helped them achieve these benefits without honor or even hope of honor.

The plebeians, they suggested, should first decide what choice they would make, then announce that choice at the next plebeian tribune elections. If the plebeians wanted the entire set of proposed laws to be passed, they should re-elect the same men as plebeian tribunes who would fully implement what was proposed. But if every plebeian just wanted only what was good for his own individual needs, there would be no need for the plebeian tribunes to continue their unpopular term of office. Neither their tribuneship, nor the proposed laws would be kept.