**6.41** "The plebeians are more interested in how they can manipulate the system to gain power, rather than earning it through merit. They aim for the highest positions to avoid the responsibilities that come with lower ones. The plebeians would rather take advantage of opportunity than prove their worth. There are many who feel insulted by being evaluated and judged and who believe that they alone, among many competitors, should be guaranteed honors. They want to escape your judgment and want your votes to be forced, not from choice as free men, but as slaves."

"I won't even mention Licinius and Sextius, whose long reign can be compared to that of the kings on the Capitoline Hill. Is there anyone so humble in the state today, for whom the path to the consulate isn't made easier by this law for us and our children? There may be times when you can't elect us, as patricians, even if you want to. Likewise, there are those plebeians you must elect, even if you don't want to."

"I've said enough about indignity. Dignity is a human quality. What about religion and the auspices? Non-observance and disrespect hurt the immortal gods. Everyone knows that this City was built and is governed by auspices in times of war and peace, at home and abroad. According to our ancestors' traditions, who holds the auspices? The patricians, of course; no plebeian magistrate is ever elected by auspices. The auspices are so peculiar to us that not only do the people elect patrician magistrates by auspices, but we ourselves, without the people's votes, appoint the interrex by auspices. In our private lives we hold those auspices, which the plebeians don't hold even in office."

"What do plebeians do, then, other than eliminate auspices from the state, who, by creating plebeian consuls, takes them away from the patricians who alone can hold them? They can now scoff at religion and ask, 'How important is it, if the sacred chickens don't eat? If they come out of the cage too slowly? If a bird sings inauspiciously or dies?' These may seem trivial, but by paying attention to these trivial matters, our ancestors have elevated this state to the highest level. "

"And now we, as if we don't need the favor of the gods, violate all religious ceremonies. Let's randomly appoint pontiffs, augurs, and sacrificial priests. Let's place the white conical hat of Flamen Dialis on anyone's head, as long as he's a man. Let's entrust our sacred shields \[ancilia\], the innermost shrines, the gods, and the worship of the gods to those to whom it is sacrilege to entrust them. Let's not enact laws or elect magistrates under auspices. Let the Senate not approve either the assemblies of the centuries or the Curiae."

"Let Sextius and Licinius rule in the City of Rome, like Romulus and Tatius, because they give away other people's money and land as gifts. The allure of taking other people's possessions is so strong. Does it not occur to you that one law creates vast wastelands in the fields by driving out the owners from their territories; the other destroys trust, without which all human society ceases to exist. For all these reasons, I believe that you should reject these proposals. "

"Whatever you decide to do, I pray that the gods make it successful."