**2.29** Having had enough of trying to coerce the plebeians on the one hand and persuading the Senate to adopt a milder course on the other, the consuls finally told the Senate, "Honorable senators, we want to warn you that a significant disturbance is imminent. We ask those who criticize us the harshest for being cowardly to help us raise the draft to get needed soldiers. We will act according to the decision of the bravest among you, if that is what you wish."

The consuls returned to their platform. They deliberately called out the name of one of the most rebellious people, one whom they could physically see, to be summoned for the draft. When the man remained silent, a group of men gathered around him in case he would be beaten. Since he didn't answer, the consuls sent a lictor to get him. The lictor was subsequently pushed back by the mob. The senators who were with the consuls were outraged by such blatant disrespect by the plebeians. They rushed from the platform to try to help the lictor. The mob then dropped their hostility toward the lictor, who was only being blocked from arresting the man, and aimed all their anger toward the senators. The consuls intervened and prevented a riot from happening. No stones or weapons had been used, so there was more heated rhetoric and shouting than physical injury done.

The Senate was summoned and assembled in disorder. Those who had been roughly handled by the mob demanded an investigation, and the most aggressive members expressed their views as much through shouting and noise as through their votes. Finally, when their anger had cooled, the consuls scolded them for being as out of control in the Senate as it was in the Forum. Then, debate began in an orderly manner. There were three different policies advocated:

Publius Verginius took a moderate stance. He suggested that they should only consider reinstating the freedom of those who, trusting in the promises made by former consul Publius Servilius, had fought in the wars against the Volscians, Auruncians, and Sabines.

Titus Largius believed that the time had passed to reward only those who had served. He said that all the plebeians were drowned in debt, and the problem could not be solved unless steps were taken for everyone, universally. He also said that if different groups were treated differently, it would only increase divisions rather than resolve them.

Appius Claudius, by nature merciless and brutal, had become even angrier from his hatred toward the plebeians on one hand and the praises from senators on the other. He said that the problems they were having weren't due to hardship, but to lawlessness. The plebeians were gathering not because of actual misery, but because they felt entitled. They were motivated by celebrating antisocial behavior more than anything else. The right to appeal, he argued, was the root cause of this serious problem. The consuls had only threats, not actual authority, because those who were part of a crime were allowed to appeal to people who were also criminals. "Come now," he said, "Let's appoint a Dictator from whom there is no appeal. This insanity which is setting everything on fire will immediately die down. I'd like to see anyone strike a lictor when he knows that his own life will be in the hands of the person whose authority he has just insulted!"