**2.32** The senators were now gripped by fear. If the army was disbanded, the secret meetings and conspiracies of the plebeians would start again. Although the army had been assembled by the Dictator, the soldiers were still bound by their oath to obey the consuls. At least, this is what the senators believed. Using the excuse of renewed hostilities with the Aequians, they ordered the legions to be led out of the City.

However, this act accelerated the sedition. It's said that, initially, there were plans to kill the consuls so the soldiers could be released from their oath. However, they learned that a criminal act could not dissolve a religious obligation.

Following the advice of Lucius Sicinius Vellutus, the soldiers left without the consuls' permission and retreated to the Sacred Mount, beyond the Anio river, three miles from the City. This version of events is more widely accepted than Piso's account, which claims the secession was made to the Aventine Hill. There, without a leader, the legions built and fortified a camp with a rampart and a trench. They remained peaceful, taking only what was necessary for survival, and didn't attack or get attacked for several days.

Meanwhile, the City was in a state of panic and business came to a halt. The plebeians left inside the City feared the senators, while the senators feared the plebeians, unsure whether it was better for them to stay or leave. How long would the seceded group remain peaceful? What would happen if a foreign war broke out during this time? The patricians saw their only hope was in the unity of the citizens and decided to restore it by any means necessary, just or unjust.

The consuls chose Menenius Agrippa to be their ambassador, an eloquent man who was well-liked by the plebeians. Agrippa was born a plebeian and was widely viewed as one of them. He was allowed into the legions' camp where he told the following story in an old-fashioned and crude style:

There was a time when the parts of the human body didn't work together as they do now. Each part had its own plan and language. The other parts were angry that they worked hard to provide for the belly, which did nothing but enjoy the pleasures they provided. They conspired to prevent their hands from bringing food to their mouths, nor their mouths from accepting what was given them, nor their teeth from chewing what they were to receive. While they tried to starve the belly from their anger, this only led to the entire body becoming extremely weak and nearly wasting away. It became clear that the belly wasn't lazy, but rather, it distributed nourishment to all parts of the body. This blood, which we live and gain strength from, is sent to the veins after the food is digested.

By comparing the rebellion of the body parts to the plebeians' anger towards the senators, he managed to influence the crowd.