**5.15** During this time, many omens were reported. Most of these weren't taken seriously because they were reported by a single person without any other witnesses and because the Etruscans, whose soothsayers the Romans typically employed to interpret evil omens, were at war with them. So, there were no soothsayers.

However, one omen caught everyone's attention: the lake in the Alban Forest rose to an unusual level without rain or any other explainable cause. This was seen as a miracle. Delegates were sent to the Oracle of Delphi to ask what the gods meant by this omen. However, a local interpreter of the fates, an old man from Veii, gave them an interpretation. Despite being mocked by both the soldiers of the Roman and Etruscan outposts, he began chanting in the manner of a prophet, saying that the Romans would never conquer Veii until the water was drained from the Alban Lake.

At first, this was dismissed as a random comment, but later it became a topic of discussion.

Eventually, one of the Roman outpost soldiers asked a townsperson from the closest town near his outpost, the war had been going on so long that they were able to converse about these things, who was this man who threw out such mysterious clues about the Alban Lake? The townsperson told the soldier that the man was an Etruscan haruspex. Being a superstitious person, the soldier pretended to want to consult the man about a personal omen and lured the soothsayer into a meeting. When both had walked further down the road from their own colleagues, unarmed and without any fear, the young and strong Roman soldier picked up the feeble, old man in front of everyone and carried him away from the Etruscans to his own side, despite the protests of the Etruscans.

The old man was carried all the way to the general and then sent to Rome to the Senate. When prompted regarding his comment about the Alban Lake, he said that the gods must certainly have been angry with the people of Veii on the day they inspired him to reveal the fatal destruction of their City. Since what he had said was under divine inspiration, it couldn't be taken back; and by hiding what the gods wanted to be known would be just as great a sin as if he revealed what should be kept secret.

According to the books of fate and Etruscan lore, he explained, when the Alban water level rose high enough that it overflowed, if the Romans drained it properly, they would be granted victory over the Veii. Before this happened, however, the gods wouldn't abandon the walls of Veii. He then explained the technical details of what the proper ritual drainage or diversion of water would be. But the Senate, not fully trusting his authority in such an important matter, decided to wait for the delegates and the responses from Pythia, the Oracle of Delphi.