**5.17** From that moment, the captive soothsayer was viewed with great respect. The consular tribunes, Cornelius and Postumius, began to consult him how to deal with the Alban prodigy and the proper appeasement of the gods.

Eventually, the Romans discovered that the gods were upset because of the neglect of ceremonies and the omission of traditional rites. It was undoubtedly because the magistrates, who were improperly elected, hadn't properly proclaimed the Latin Festival and the solemnities on Mount Alba had not been properly performed. The only way to atone for this was for the consular tribunes to resign their office, the auspices to be taken again, and an interregnum to begin.

All these actions were carried out according to a decree of the Senate. There were three interreges following one after the other in succession, Lucius Valerius, Quintus Servilius Fidenas, and Marcus Furius Camillus. Meanwhile, disturbances continued, with the plebeian tribunes blocking the elections until it was agreed that the majority of the consular tribunes should be elected from the plebeians.

While this was happening, the Etruscan tribes met in council at the Temple of Voltumna. The Capenates and Faliscans asked that all the Etruscans collectively join together to help lift the siege of Veii. The response given from the council was that they had already refused the request from the Veientes because the Veientes shouldn't be asking for advice from a council whose advice hadn't been consulted in the first place. They had no standing to ask for help now.

At present, the council would continue to decline aid, but it was now for the Etruscans' own sake. They would not risk their fortunes for the Veientes. Much of the Etruscans' land was now occupied by an unfamiliar people, new Gallic settlers, with whom they couldn't establish a reliable peace nor a certain war. However, out of consideration for their shared blood, their name, and the present dangers faced by their kinsmen, they agreed that if any of the young Etruscan men wished to go to war voluntarily, they wouldn't be stopped.

In Rome, there were reports that a large number of enemy forces had arrived. Therefore, as is typical, internal conflicts began to subside in the face of a common threat.