**5.18** With the support of the Senate, Publius Licinius Calvus, though not a candidate, was elected consular tribune by the praerogative centuries. He was a man known for his moderation in his previous tribunate, but now he was very old. It was noted that his colleagues from that same year would be reappointed as well, including Lucius Titinius, Publius Maenius, Gnaeus Genucius, and Lucius Atilius. Before they were confirmed, the tribes were summoned, and with the permission of the interrex, Publius Licinius Calvus spoke:

"Quirites, I see that by remembering our previous magistracy, you're hoping to achieve the same unity as we had in our past leadership. Indeed, this is very important right now for the coming year. While you also re-elected the same colleagues who are even better through their experience, I am not the same man. I am merely the remaining shadow and the name of Publius Licinius. My physical strength has faded. My sight and hearing have weakened. My memory is unreliable, and my mental sharpness has dulled."

"Look at this young man," he said, holding his son, "he's the image of the man you once made a consular tribune, the first from among the plebeians. This young man, whom I've trained myself, I offer and dedicate to the state as a replacement for me. And I ask you, Quirites, to give the honor you have willingly offered to me to him, as he requested, and with my prayers on his behalf."

The father's request was granted, and his son, Publius Licinius, was declared a consular tribune along with those I mentioned earlier.

Consular Tribunes Titinius and Genucius went against the Faliscans and Capenates. They fought courageously but, lacking prudence, they fell into an ambush. Genucius died honorably, paying for his recklessness by falling to his death before the standards in the front lines. Titinius, after gathering his frightened men on a hill, reformed their battle lines. However, he didn't dare to fight the enemy on flat ground.

The defeat of both consular tribunes was more embarrassing than damaging, but it nearly turned into a great slaughter. It caused terror not only in Rome, where exaggerated versions of the story reached the citizens, but also in the Roman camp at Veii. There, the Roman soldiers were barely stopped from running away, as rumors spread through the camp that the commanders and the army had been killed and that the victorious Capenates, Faliscans, and all the young men of the Etruscans were close by.

The tumult in Rome was greater than this, for they believed even worse stories such as a rumor that the Roman camp at Veii was being assailed, and that part of the enemy was heading in a furious column toward the City, ready to attack. There was a rush to the walls of the City and women, drawn from out of their homes by the fear, prayed in the temples. Petitions were made to the gods begging them to keep destruction away from their homes, their roofs, temples, and the walls of Rome, and to turn that fear against Veii, provided that the sacred rites had been properly performed, and the omens had been appeased.