**5.2** When the Roman generals decided that a siege of Veii would be more effective than an assault, they began to construct winter quarters. War during the wintertime was a new concept for the Roman soldiers, and the plan was to continue the siege perpetually by simply remaining there and not returning home.

When news of this reached Rome, the plebeian tribunes, who had been looking a long time for a reason to stir up trouble, seized the opportunity. They rushed to the assembly and agitated the plebeians, saying that this was the reason soldiers were now paid. This "gift" from the Senate was smeared with poison, and the freedom of the plebeians had been sold. Freedom had come to the plebeians but the young men would be sent away forever from the City and the Republic, not even allowed to return home during the winter or at any time of the year to see to their homes and property. What did they think was the cause of this prolonged military service? They could find no other reason than it was a plan to ensure that the nothing would be done for the plebeians in the absence of their young men, in whom all the strength of the plebeians was concentrated.

These young soldiers would be working harder than the Veientes, they said, who were comfortably spending the winter under their own roofs, defending their city with their strong walls and natural defenses. Meanwhile, the Roman soldiers, covered with snow and frost, living in tents, would be enduring hardship and toil, not able to put down their weapons even during the winter, which had traditionally been a break from all wars both on land and by sea. Neither the kings, nor the proud consuls before the tribune power, nor the harsh dictators, nor the oppressive decemvirs had ever imposed upon them the duty of perpetual military service. The consular tribunes were now exercising a kind of kingship over the Roman plebeians, they claimed. What would these men do if they were consuls or dictators, given that they're already so harsh and overbearing?

This was no accident, they said. There had never been a single spot for a plebeian among the eight consular tribunes. At one time, the patricians would struggle to fill three positions, yet now they were taking up eight positions: not one plebeian among them. A plebeian, if nothing else, could remind his colleagues that the soldiers were free citizens, not slaves, and the soldiers should be allowed to return home at least during the winter, to see their parents, children and spouses, and at some time of the year enjoy their freedom and participate in the election of magistrates.

While they were making these arguments, the plebeian tribunes encountered an old opponent, Appius Claudius, left behind by his colleagues to suppress any sedition by plebeian tribunes. Claudius was a man who'd been trained from a young age to fight the plebeians. They remembered that, in previous years, he'd advocated the intervention of his colleagues to break the power of the plebeian tribunes.