**5.4** Appius Claudius continued, "I'll later explain why my colleagues' plan, which keeps the army at Veii until the mission is complete, isn't just useful but necessary."

"For now, I just want to talk about the soldiers' situation. I believe my thoughts on this matter would be seen as reasonable not only by you, but also by the soldiers themselves, if they were to hear them. Even if I couldn't think of anything to say on this topic, I'd be fine using the arguments made by my opponents. They recently argued that soldiers should not be paid because, traditionally, they never have been. So why are they upset now that more work is being asked of those who are receiving more benefits? There's no such thing as work without reward, or reward without some effort. Hard work and pleasure, though very different, are naturally connected."

"In the past, soldiers were upset that they had to serve the Republic at their own expense. However, they were happy to spend part of the year working their own land, earning the means to support themselves and their families at home and during war. Now, they're happy that serving the Republic benefits them, and they gladly accept their pay. So, they should be patient about being away from home and their family responsibilities, which are no longer a financial burden. If the state were to ask them to settle their accounts, wouldn't it be fair to say, ‘You're paid for a year, so work for a year. Do you think it's fair to get a year's pay for six months of service?' Quirites, I hesitate to dwell on the issue. This is how you deal with hired soldiers."

"But we want to deal with you as fellow citizens, and we think it's only fair that you deal with us as your countrymen. Either we shouldn't have started this war, or we should conduct it in a way that upholds the dignity of the Roman people and end it as soon as possible. However, it'll only end if we keep up the pressure on the besieged and don't leave until we've achieved our goal of capturing Veii. In fact, by Hercules, if there were no other reason, even just the shame of giving up should make us keep going."

"Didn't Greece keep a city under siege for ten years because of a single woman? How far from home they were! How many lands and seas away! Yet we're complaining about a year-long siege just twenty miles from us, almost within sight of our own city. Is it because the cause of the war is trivial, and there's not enough righteous anger to make us keep going?"

"The Veii have attacked us seven times now. They have never been trustworthy in peacetime. They have ravaged our lands a thousand times. They forced the Fidenates to turn against us and they killed our colonists there! They broke the Law of Nations by murdering our ambassadors! They tried to turn all the tribes of the Etruscans against us, and they're still trying today. Our ambassadors barely escaped being assaulted again when we were only asking for restitution."