**1.32** When King Tullus died, the government was handed back to the Senate. They again chose an interrex who held an election, and the people voted for Ancus Marcius to be king. The Senate, in response, confirmed their choice.

King Ancus Marcius was the grandson of King Numa Pompilius. His mother was Numa's daughter. Now that Ancus had become king, he thought a lot about his grandfather's reputation. While the previous reign was successful in many ways, in fact it was very prosperous, he felt it had failed in one area: religion. Either the religious rituals were completely ignored, or they were done incorrectly. Ancus believed it was very important to reform this part of Roman life and perform these rites correctly, just as Numa had established them.

He ordered the pontiff to write down all the rituals from the king's notes on white tablets and display them in a public place for everyone to see. From this, both the Roman citizens, who were weary of war and were hoping for peace, and the neighboring cities, hoped that the king would adopt his grandfather's customs and institutions.

The Latins, who had made a treaty with Tullus, saw this as an opportunity and became more confident in their strength. They invaded and plundered Roman lands, responding disrespectfully and haughtily when the Romans asked for their property back. The Latins thought that this new king would be overly pious with his religious duties, spending time in his chapels and altars, and uninterested in fighting back.

As far as personality, Ancus was a mix of his grandfather, King Numa, and King Romulus. While peace was necessary during the constant violence of his grandfather's time, Ancus felt he couldn't enjoy peace if the Romans were under constant attack. He felt that his patience was being tested and taken for granted and that, in the current times, a warlike king like Tullus was needed more than a king like Numa.

Just as Numa had performed religious rituals during peacetime, Ancus decided he himself should perform warlike ceremonies, and wars would not only be waged but also declared by some ritual. He borrowed the ritual for addressing grievances from an ancient tribe of Aequians. It is still repeated by fetials to this day.

The ritual went like this:

When a fetial priest arrived at the borders of the people with whom the Romans had a grievance, he covered his head with a wool veil and said: "Hear me, Jupiter! Hear me, borders of …" then named whichever nation was being addressed, and then, "Hear me, Divine Law!"

"I am the official messenger of the Roman people. I come in righteousness and piety as an ambassador. Let my words be believed." At this point, he recited the demands for restitution. To finish, he called upon Jupiter as his witness, saying: "If I demand unjustly and am asking impiously for the surrender of these people and these possessions, then may you never let me return to my homeland safely."

He said these words multiple times: when he crossed the border, when he came across the first people inside the territory, and when he entered the city gates. Also, he said them when he entered into their forum, with only a few changes in the form and wording of the oath.

If the demands weren't met within thirty-three days, for so many are festival days, he declared war thus: "Hear, Jupiter! Hear, Janus Quirinus! Hear all heavenly gods, gods of earth, and gods of the lower world! I ask you to witness that this nation…", naming whatever people it is, "is unjust and did not make fair reparations. Now, we will consult the elders in our City as to how we may obtain our rights." At that point, the fetial returns to Rome for further instructions.

Immediately, the King would consult the senators, using words such as these: "Concerning the matter of stolen property, disputes, and other grievances declared by the pater patratus or head fetial, of the Roman people against the pater patratus of the Ancient Latins and the men of the Ancient Latins, grievances which they haven't delivered, nor fulfilled, nor satisfied, things which ought to have been delivered, fulfilled, and satisfied, tell me," turning to the man whose opinion he would typically ask first, "what do you think?"

Then the senator would reply: "I believe that restitution should be sought in warfare that is just and reverent. I give my consent and approval." The other senators were then asked, in order, and when the majority of those present consented in favor of war, it was settled. War had been agreed upon.

It was then customary for the fetial to carry an iron or blood-stained wooden spear to the border of the other nation and, in the presence of at least three adult men, say:

"Whereas the tribes of the Ancient Latins and men of the Ancient Latins have been guilty of acts and offenses against the Roman people; and whereas the Roman people have commanded that war be made on the Ancient Latins, and the Senate of the Roman people has approved, agreed, and voted for a war with the Ancient Latins. For this reason, I and the Roman people declare and make war on the tribes of the Ancient Latins and the men of the Ancient Latins."

Having said this, he would throw his spear over the border into their territory signaling the official beginning of war.

This is the way in which war was declared against the Latins during Ancus Marcius' reign and was preserved as the traditional Roman method of declaring war for future generations.