**6.12** Dictator Cossus understood that he would face a bigger challenge at home rather than abroad. Whether the war demanded speed or that he believed that a victory and a Triumph would increase the power of his dictatorship, he held a draft and then went to the Pomptine territory where he had heard that the Volscians had brought their army.

I'm sure that, in addition to feeling overwhelmed, those reading about so many wars with the Volscians will wonder, as I often have done when reading the works of writers who lived closer to these events, where the Volscians and Aequians, who were defeated so often, got their soldiers from. This question has been ignored and not mentioned by ancient writers. What can I say about this, except to give my own opinion, which anyone can form for themselves.

It seems most likely that they used, as is now done in Roman drafts, successive generations of their young men, one after the other, during the breaks between wars. Or perhaps the armies weren't always made up of soldiers from the same states, even though the same nation was at war. Or perhaps there were near infinite amounts of free men in those places back then, whereas today they are depopulated and only a shadow of a garrison is left; the places that do exist are kept from total desertion only by Roman slaves.

It's certain, as all authors agree, that even though the Volscian power was greatly reduced under the leadership and auspices of Camillus, the Volscian army was immense. In addition, the Latins and Hernicians had joined them, as well as some people from Circeii, and some Roman colonists from Velitrae.

Dictator Cossus set up his camp that day. The next day, after taking the auspices and offering sacrifices to ask for the gods' favor, he appeared before the soldiers in good spirits. They had already armed themselves at dawn, having been told to prepare as soon as the signal for battle was displayed.

"Soldiers," he said, "victory is ours, if the gods and their soothsayers can see at all what is coming in the future. So, as men full of confidence who are ready to fight against those who are weaker: let's put our spears at our feet; let's arm our right hands only with our swords. I don't want anyone to move from the line. Stand firm. Receive the enemy's charge with a steadiness. When they have thrown their weapons and discovered they are ineffective, they will break their ranks and rush at you as you stand firm. At that point, then let your swords flash. Remember that it is the gods who help the Romans, the same gods who have sent you into battle with favorable omens."

"Titus Quinctius, you hold back the cavalry, carefully watching the very beginning of the battle. As soon as you see the armies locked in foot-to-foot combat, then, while they're distracted by fear, strike another fear into them with your cavalry, and by charging at them, scatter the ranks of those engaged in the fight."

Thus, the cavalry and the infantry fought just as he had ordered them. Dictator Cossus didn't fail the legions, nor did Fortune fail Dictator Cossus.