**6.13** The multitude of the enemy, depending solely on their large numbers and judging both armies by guesswork alone, recklessly began the battle but ended it just as recklessly. They seemed fierce with their battle cries, their projectile weapons and the initial charge. However, at the start of the fight, they couldn't withstand the swords, the close combat, and the fiery looks of the enemy, fueled by their passion for the fight.

The enemy's front line was then pushed back, causing confusion among their reserve troops. Then the Roman cavalry joined in and added to their terror. Their lines were broken in many places, everything was in motion, and their line seemed like a wave. When the front-line soldiers fell, each soldier realized that death was imminent, and they turned to flee.

The Romans ran after them closely on foot. As long as the enemy retreated in armed groups, the infantry had to chase them. When they noticed that Volscian weapons were being discarded everywhere and that the enemy was scattering across the countryside, cavalry squadrons were sent out after them to round them up. The infantry was instructed not to waste time killing individuals, which would allow the majority to escape. It was enough to slow the main body of soldiers down by launching projectiles at their columns and crossing their path to terrorize them. The cavalry would ride alongside them to keep them grouped, until the infantry could catch up and finish them off. The flight and slaughter didn't end until nightfall.

On the same day, the Volscians' camp was also captured and looted, and all the spoils, except for free individuals, were given to the soldiers. Most of the prisoners were Latins and Hernicians; they weren't commoners, suggesting that they were mercenaries hired to fight. Some upper-class youths were found among them, clearly indicating that the Volscian enemies had received official support from the former allies. Some of the people from Circeii were also recognized, as well as colonists from Velitrae. They were all sent to Rome, and, when questioned by the leading senators, they revealed the same information as they had told the Dictator: they and their people had defected.