**6.16** Dictator Cossus demanded that he stop quibbling, avoiding the issue. Either prove the validity of your information, he said, or admit that you falsely accused the Senate not just about stealing treasure but also that the Senate was also lying about it, a particularly unsavory charge.

When Manlius refused to speak because the Dictator requested it, he was ordered to be taken to prison. Upon his arrest, he appealed to the gods, saying, "O Jupiter Optimus Maximus, Juno Regina, and Minerva, and all other gods and goddesses who inhabit the Capitoline Hill and Citadel, do you allow your soldier and defender to be treated this way by his enemies? Will this right hand, which defended your temples from the Gauls, now be bound in chains?"

The sight and sound of this was hard for anyone to bear, but the state, tolerant of legitimate authority, had given certain offices absolute power. Neither the plebeian tribunes nor the plebeians themselves dared to oppose the dictatorial power. When Manlius was thrown into prison, many of the plebeians mourned, let their hair and beards grow, and gathered dejectedly at the prison entrance.

Dictator Cossus triumphed over the Volscians, but it brought him more hatred than glory. People grumbled that victory was achieved domestically, not abroad, and was celebrated over a citizen, not an enemy. They said the only thing missing from Cossus' arrogance was Manlius being paraded in chains before his chariot. The situation was close to becoming a rebellion.

To calm things down, the Senate, without anyone asking, generously decided to establish a colony of two thousand Roman citizens in Satricum, giving each two and a half jugera of land. But this was seen as insufficient, benefiting only a few, and as a bribe for betraying Marcus Manlius, which only inflamed the rebellion. Manlius' supporters became more noticeable, both in their dirty, unkempt clothing and appearing like they, themselves, faced prosecution.

Once the Dictator stepped down after his triumph, people felt free to express their thoughts and opinions.