**6.19** However, the Senate started to discuss the secret meeting of the plebeians in a private residence, by chance located inside the Citadel. They also discussed the significant threat to freedom. A large faction exclaimed that they needed a Servilius Ahala, who, not by ordering him to jail and infuriating the public enemy, would instead end a civil war with the loss of one citizen.

The Senate decided on a milder sentence, but one that held the same power so that the magistrates would ensure that the Republic was not harmed by the destructive plans of Marcus Manlius. The consular tribunes and the plebeian tribunes also submitted to the Senate's authority. They knew that the end of their power meant freedom for all.

They all then consulted on what needed to be done.

When the only solution that came to mind was violence and bloodshed, which would obviously come with great risk, Marcus Menenius and Quintus Publilius, plebeian tribunes, asked, "Why are we turning this into a battle between the patricians and the plebeians, when it should be between the state and one destructive citizen? Why are we attacking a man and the plebeians, when it would be safer to attack him with the aid of the plebeians themselves, so that he may be defeated by his own strength?"

"We're considering setting a trial date for him. Nothing is less popular than monarchy. Once the crowd sees that it isn't a contest between the patricians and the plebeians, they'll cease to be his supporters and become his judges. There will be plebeians who will accuse him themselves, and when they look upon a patrician on trial for the crime of aspiring to kingship, they'll favor their own liberty above all else."