**5.33** And so Marcus Furius Camillus, a citizen so vital to Rome that his presence could have prevented its capture, was expelled by the Romans.

Disaster headed toward the condemned City and its unaware inhabitants as ambassadors from Clusium arrived, seeking help against the Gauls. It's believed that the Gauls, attracted by the fertile lands and especially the wine, a new pleasure at that time, crossed the Alps and took over lands previously being farmed by the Etruscans. Arruns of Clusium is said to have introduced wine into Gaul to entice the people. He did it out of anger because Lucumo, a youth whom he had once been the guardian to, seduced his wife. Lucumo had become so powerful that Arruns couldn't seek revenge without calling for outside assistance.

It's said that Arruns guided the Gauls across the Alps and suggested they besiege Clusium. While it's plausible that Arruns or another Clusium native led the Gauls to Clusium, it's clear that the Gauls who besieged Clusium weren't the first to cross the Alps. The Gauls had entered Italy two hundred years before they attacked Clusium and captured Rome. Nor was this their first conflict with the Etruscans, because long before that, Gallic armies had often fought with the people who lived between the Apennines and the Alps.

Before the Roman Empire, the power of the Etruscans extended widely over land and sea. How great their power was on the upper and lower seas, surrounding Italy like an island, is apparent from the names whereby the Italian people called one of the seas Tuscan, the general designation of the race. The other was called Hadriatic named after Haria, an Etruscan colony. The Greeks referred to these seas as the Tyrrhenian and the Adriatic.

The Etruscans inhabited lands bordering on both seas occupying twelve cities on each side. The first twelve cities were established on the side of the Apennines facing the lower sea, the Tyrrhenian, and later, the same number of original cities were established beyond the Apennines on the Adriatic. They sent colonies to fill them and controlled all the land beyond the Po, up to the Alps, except for the corner where the Veneti lived, located around the bay of the sea as far as the Alps. They also undoubtedly originated with the Alpine peoples, particularly the Raetians whose harsh environment made them so savage that they retained nothing of their ancient culture, only the accent of their original language, and even that was corrupted over time.