**3.8** From this point, it could have been due to the favor of the gods or due to the passing of the unhealthy season, but the people's health began to improve. The Romans had overcome disease and started to focus on public matters again.

When several interregna had passed, Publius Valerius Publicola, three days into his role as interrex, facilitated the election of Lucius Lucretius Tricipitinus and Titus Veturius Geminus or Vetusius as consuls. The consuls assumed their roles on the third day before the eleventh of August. The state was now strong enough to not only defend against attacks but also to initiate them.

When the Hernician allies reported enemy incursions into their borders, help was quickly promised by Rome. Two consular armies were formed. Consul Veturius and his army were sent to wage an offensive war against the Volscians. During that war, he defeated the Volscians and drove them off with only one battle.

Consul Lucretius was tasked with defense, protecting the allies' territory from damage or looting. He didn't venture beyond the Hernician lands. While there, a band of raiders slipped past him over the Praenestine Mountains, descending into the plains. This group ravaged the fields around Praeneste and Gabii, then moved toward the Tusculan hills. This caused great alarm in Rome, more due to the suddenness of the event than a lack of strength to resist. Quintus Fabius, the former consul who was in command of the City, ensured security and tranquility by arming the young men and setting up guards. Accordingly, the Aequians and Volscians, not daring to approach Rome, instead looted the surrounding areas and retreated by a roundabout route.

As the Aequians and Volscians moved further away, the more careless they became. They encountered Consul Lucretius, who, though they had gotten past his defense the first time, had been tracking their line of march and was prepared for battle. Despite being outnumbered, Consul Lucretius' forces, ready in spirit, attacked with determination, causing panic among the enemy, routing them and putting them to flight. The Romans drove them into deep valleys where escape was difficult, and surrounded them. The Volscian nation was almost entirely wiped out. Some histories record that thirteen-thousand four-hundred-seventy soldiers were killed in the field or in flight. During the pursuit, one thousand seven-hundred fifty were captured alive and twenty-seven military standards were taken. Even if these numbers are exaggerated, the slaughter was nonetheless significant.

Victorious, Consul Lucretius returned to the permanent camp with an immense haul of loot. The consuls then combined their camps together. Likewise, the Volscians and Aequians also consolidated their shattered forces into one army. The ensuing battle of consolidated forces was the third battle of that year, and the Romans were victorious again. Fortune bestowed the victory where she had done before. The enemy was so badly routed that the Aequians and Volscians even lost their camp.