**1.13** At this point, the Sabine women, who were the cause of the war, threw off their womanly fear and bravely ran onto the battlefield amid the flying weapons. With ripped clothing and disheveled hair, they crossed the space between the two armies to block the hostile forces from each other. They calmed their fathers on one side and husbands on the other, begging them not to stain themselves with the impious blood of their relatives, fathers against sons-in-law, sons-in-law against fathers. They pleaded with them not to taint their children with the crime of parricide, those on one side would be killing grandsons, and those on the other would be killing their own offspring "If you're angry about our marriages, and if you despise this new kinship, turn your anger on us. We caused this war and the injuries to our husbands and fathers. But we'd rather die than live as widows without our husbands or as orphans without our fathers."

The situation moved both the multitude and the leaders. Silence and a sudden calm fell as the fighting ceased. The leaders from both sides were moved and they then started walking forward to negotiate a treaty. Not only did they agree on peace, but they decided to unite the two peoples into a single state. They merged their two kingdoms and all power was transferred to Rome. The City was thus doubled,

To honor the Sabines, as they were now Roman citizens, their community would be called the Quirites, from their old Sabine capital of Cures. The place where the battle ended was called Curtius Lake to memorialize the place where Mettius Curtius was launched from his horse and fell into the swamp but escaped onto safer ground.

From such a bitter war, this sudden peace made the Sabine women even more appreciated by everyone involved; their husbands, parents, and especially Romulus. When he divided the people into thirty curiae in honor of their courage, he named each group after a Sabine woman. It isn't recorded how they were chosen, since there was undoubtedly a somewhat greater number of women than thirty, or whether they were chosen by age or status or by lot.

At the same time, three centuries of cavalry, were formed. One named after King Romulus, called the Ramnes; one named after Titus Tatius of the Sabines, called the Tities; and one called Luceres. The origin of the name Luceres is unknown, however.

From then on, not only was the kingdom shared, but it was a truly harmonious joint rule under two kings.