**1.14** Years later, some of King Tatius' relatives attacked the ambassadors of Laurentium. When the Laurentines sought justice according to the Law of Nations where ambassadors are sacrosanct, Tatius sided with his relatives and refused to punish them. As a result, he brought the punishment on himself: when he went to Lavinium for a solemn sacrifice, a mob gathered, and he was killed there.

Some sources say Romulus didn't react as strongly as he should have, either because he felt Tatius was an unreliable partner in their shared rule, or because he thought Tatius deserved his fate. Instead of going to war over the incident, Romulus, in order to make amends for Tatius' actions and his assassination, renewed the peace treaty between Rome and Lavinium. This unexpected peace continued with Lavinium.

However, a new war started closer to home, almost at the gates of Rome.

The Fidenates, feeling threatened by Rome's growing power, decided to attack before Rome became too strong. They sent a group of young soldiers to ravage the land between their city of Fidenae and Rome. Then, turning to the left, because the Tiber blocked the way on the right, they plundered the countryside striking terror into the farmers, whose rush from the fields into the City brought the first news of war. Realizing the urgency of the situation, as war so close could not be ignored, Romulus led his army out and set up camp a mile from Fidenae.

There, leaving a small garrison at the camp, he led the rest of his forces out and ordered a part of his soldiers to hide in ambush in the thick undergrowth of the bushy areas. Then, he set out with the greater part of the army and all of his cavalry and rode up to Fidenae with a noisy and aggressive display near the gates hoping to draw them out.. The cavalry purposefully looked disorganized as they feigned attacking and then retreating encouraging the enemy to pursue them. As hoped, the Fidenates, seeing an uncoordinated and chaotic cavalry attack and troops retreating, suddenly poured out through the gates, hurling themselves against the Roman line, eager to press on and follow the now retreating cavalry. In the heat of the battle and pursuit of the cavalry they were drawn to the site of the ambush.

The Romans suddenly rose from their ambush and attacked the enemy's flanks. At the same time the armed garrison left behind in the Roman camp moved forward with their battle standards, adding to the chaos. The Fidenates, terrified and confused by being attacked on multiple sides, started to panic and fled almost before Romulus and his cavalry had time to turn their horses around to charge them. Their retreat quickly became a disorganized rout as those who had been chasing the Romans now desperately tried to reach the safety of the city. However, the Fidenates didn't escape. The Romans, clinging to their rear, rushed in with the enemy as if in a single column, entering the city before the gates could be closed.