**1.16** After achieving these immortal deeds, Romulus held an assembly at the plain in the marsh of Capra to review the army when a violent storm arrived with a great crash of thunder and lightning. A thick cloud covered Romulus so completely that it hid him from the view of the assembly. After this, no one saw Romulus again on earth.

The Roman youth, after their fear had subsided and the storm was over, stood silently as the sky filled with light and became calm. When they saw that Romulus wasn't on his throne anymore, they believed the senators who had been close to him proclaiming that the storm had carried him up to the heavens. They were also afraid and grieving at their sudden loss and so, maintained a mournful silence for a long time.

Then, some people began to murmur, followed by the whole assembly, calling Romulus a god, the son of a god, and the king and father of Rome. They prayed to him, asking him for peace and that he may always, in his mercy, protect his people.

I believe that there were also some who silently accused the senators of murdering King Romulus tearing him apart with their own hands. This rumor was passed around, but it remained vague and obscure. The more widely accepted version was made famous by the admiration of the man and their present fear.

To further the story along, a popular figure, Proculus Julius, spoke to the people while they were still in mourning and harboring resentment against the senators. He was a respected, serious man who went into the assembly and said:

"Quirites, citizens of Rome: the father of our City, Romulus, suddenly descended from the sky and appeared to me at the first light of the day. As I stood there, in awe and reverence, I prayed that I might look at him face to face. Then he spoke, 'Go tell the Romans that the gods desire that my Rome should be the head of the world. Therefore, let them devote themselves to military affairs, and let them know and thus hand down to posterity that no human power can resist Roman arms.' After saying this, he ascended back into the sky."

It is wonderful how readily the people believed Proculus Julius' words and how their grief for Romulus was eased by the certainty of his immortality. Both the people and the army were comforted by the fact that he hadn't died but had been taken up to the gods.