**1.6** While this was going on, Numitor helped the twins' plot by repeatedly shouting that enemies had entered the city and had attacked the palace. He then sent the Alban youth away from the palace to protect the citadel with a garrison and arms. Once he saw Romulus and Remus coming to congratulate him, he knew that Amulius was dead.

He assembled the people together to tell them about everything: his brother's cruel actions towards him, the story of his grandchildren, their birth, upbringing, and how they were found. He also told them about the king's death and that he was responsible for it. The young men entered the middle of the assembly in formation, and saluted their grandfather as king in front of the crowd. The people cheered in approval, confirming Numitor's title and authority as ruler.

With King Numitor now in charge of Alba Longa, Romulus and Remus wanted to move on and build a city in the place where they had been abandoned and raised. Alba Longa was now growing and overflowing with Albans, Latins, and shepherds. As a result of such explosive growth, everyone believed that Alba Longa and Lavinium would be small compared to the city the twins planned to build. However, their desire for power and their ambition, which had been the source of violence done to their grandfather, disrupted these plans. It would lead to a shameful fight between them over something very trivial.

Since they were twins and there was no clear leader for the new city, they decided to let the gods of the area choose who would name and rule the new city by watching for a divine sign in the form of birds.