**1.9** The Roman state had grown so strong that it could compete with any neighboring nations in war. However, due to a lack of women, its greatness was at risk of lasting only one generation. The Romans had no children and no marriages with their neighbors. So, on the advice of the Senate, Romulus sent ambassadors to nearby states to ask for alliances and intermarriage with their new population. They said that cities, like everything else, start small and grow aided by their own courage, and with the help of the gods they can achieve great wealth and renown. Rome, in their view, had both divine help and its own courage and self-reliance. Therefore, they shouldn't hesitate to mix their bloodlines with the Romans and unite with them as one people.

The appeal to neighboring states didn't go well. The Roman ambassadors weren't met with a favorable reception anywhere, as neighboring states both feared Rome's growing power and worried about their own future. They sarcastically asked the ambassadors if they also opened an asylum for women, as that seemed to be the only way they could find wives.

As the insults found their way back to Rome, the young Romans were infuriated. and hinted that there might be violence. Romulus, hiding his own anger, planned games in honor of Neptune, the god of horses, which he called the "The Consualia." The spectacle was announced to their neighbors, and with as much magnificence as they knew or were able to display at the time, the Romans organized the event to make it famous and eagerly anticipated. A large number came, curious to see the new City especially the Caeninians, Crustumini, and Antemnates. Even the Sabines came with their children and their wives. The Romans invited them hospitably into their homes, and when the visitors had seen the layout of the city, the walls, and the numerous houses, they marveled at the growth of the Roman state in such a short time.

When the time for the spectacle came, and the audience was fully engaged watching it, a pre-arranged fight broke out signaling the Roman youth to immediately kidnap and drag away the young virgins. Most of the women were taken by whomever chanced upon them. Some of the most beautiful women were taken to the homes of the leading senators by plebeians who were hired for this purpose. One particularly beautiful woman was carried off by a group belonging to a certain Thalassius. When people asked to whom she was being carried, they were told "to Thalassius" to ensure she wouldn't be violated. This was the origin of a what eventually became a traditional Roman wedding phrase.

Troubled by fear, the sad parents of the kidnapped women fled from the games. They felt betrayed by the Romans and called upon the god whose festival and games they had come to celebrate in good faith. The kidnapped women themselves were indignant and filled with despair.

But Romulus personally went around and reassured them, explaining that this happened due to the arrogance of their fathers, who had refused to allow their daughters to intermarry with the Romans. He assured them that they would be married and would now be honored as wives, sharing in all the rights and fortunes of their husbands and be a part of the new state. Most importantly, and something most dear to human nature, they would become mothers of free citizens. He asked them to calm their anger and give their hearts to their new husbands whom fate had given their bodies. He reminded them that sometimes misfortune over time can lead to deep gratitude. He promised that their husbands would prove to be better men since they would strive not only to be good husbands but also would do their best to fulfill the desires of parents and homeland. The husbands also tried to soothe their new wives with words of love and desire, which are the most effective means of persuasion for a woman's heart.