**7.29** From now on, we will list wars of greater importance, judged by the strength of the enemy, the distance traveled, or the length of the battle.

In that particular year, the Romans took up arms against the Samnites, a nation rich in wealth and military strength. The war with the Samnites was marked by an uncertain outcome. Pyrrhus later became the enemy following the Samnite war, which was then succeeded by a war with the Carthaginians. What a vast array of events! How many times has Rome been faced with the extremes of danger only to elevate the empire to its current size, which is now barely maintained!

However, the cause of the war between the Samnites and Romans, who had been allies and friends, came from an external source; it didn't originate within their own ranks. The Samnites unjustly started a war, using their superior strength against the weaker Sidicinians. The Sidicinians, forced to seek help from a stronger power, allied themselves with Campania. The Campanians, accustomed to luxury rather than to the use of arms, offered more in reputation than actual strength to their allies.

The Campanians were driven out of Sidicinian territory by the battle-hardened Samnites, thus drawing attention to themselves and the turning the tide of the war against them. The Samnites, abandoning the Sidicinians, targeted Campania as the principal stronghold of the neighboring states. Victory would be easy, but the spoils and glory would be greater.

After occupying Tifata on the hills overlooking Capua, with a strong garrison, the Samnites descended onto the plain between Capua and Tifata in a square formation. A second battle ensued; the Campanians, after a failed fight, retreated within their walls. With their strongest, youngest fighters cut down and no immediate hope nearby, the Campanians were forced to request aid from the Romans.