**7.30** The Campanian ambassadors, upon being welcomed into the Senate, delivered a speech along these lines:

"Honorable senators, we've been sent by the Campanian state to request your eternal friendship and immediate assistance. If we had asked for this when our situation was stable, it would have been easier to establish, though perhaps less binding. At that time, we would've remembered that we entered into friendship as equals; while we would have been as friendly, we might have been less obedient to your desires. Now, however, we're drawn to you by your compassion and defended by your help in our dire circumstances. It's our duty to show our gratitude for the kindness we have received, lest we appear ungrateful and unworthy of help from either gods or humans."

"Nor, by Hercules, do I believe that the fact that the Samnites became your allies and friends first should prevent us from also becoming your friends. It merely shows that they were there first and have a degree of honor. There is no clause in your treaty with the Samnites that prevents you from forming new alliances."

"It has always been enough for you that those who seek your friendship truly wish to be your friends. We, the Campanians, despite our current situation which forbids us to boast, don't yield to any state except yours in terms of the size of our city or the fertility of our land. We seek to be your friends, which I believe will be a significant addition to your thriving state. We will stand against the Aequians and Volscians, the eternal enemies of this City, whenever they rise up. Whatever you do first to protect our safety, we will do the same to protect your empire and glory. Once the nations between us are subdued, which your bravery and good fortune will surely achieve, your rule will extend uninterrupted to our frontier."

"It's distressing to admit that we've come to this point, but we Campanians must be either friends or enemies. If you defend us, we're yours; if you abandon us, we will belong to the Samnites. Consider whether you would prefer that Capua and all of Campania be added to your power or to that of the Samnites."

"Romans, it's only fair that your compassion and aid should be available to all, but it should especially be available to those who, while helping others, provide more than their strength allows and find themselves in distress. Although we claimed that we fought for the Sidicinians, in reality, we were fighting for ourselves when we saw a neighboring people being attacked by the wicked aggression of the Samnites. And once the Sidicinians had been consumed by fire, we knew that fire would be transferred to us."

"The Samnites aren't attacking us because they're seeking revenge, but because they're glad to have an excuse. If they were seeking revenge, wouldn't it have been enough that they defeated our legions twice, once in the Sidicinian territory and once again in Campania itself? What kind of revenge isn't satisfied by the bloodshed in two major battles? Add to this the devastation of our lands, the theft of our people and livestock, the burning and destruction of our homes, and everything destroyed by fire and sword. Couldn't revenge be satisfied with this? But their greed must be satisfied. They're driven to besiege Capua. They either want to destroy our beautiful city or to possess it for themselves. But, Romans, I urge you to take possession of it in your kindness, rather than let them take it by a wicked crime."

"I'm not speaking to a people who shy away from justifiable wars. However, I believe that if you merely show your support, you won't need to go to war. The Samnites' contempt has only reached us; it doesn't extend to you. Therefore, Romans, we can be protected even by the mere suggestion of your support. Whatever we have after this, whatever we ourselves have, we're prepared to consider it all yours. For you, the Campanian fields will be plowed; for you, the city of Capua will be populated; you'll be to us like founders, parents, even immortal gods. There will be no colony of yours that will surpass us in obedience and loyalty to you." 

"Honorable senators, grant your approval to the Campanians of your divine and invincible support, and bid them hope that Capua will have a safe future. Imagine the crowds of people from all walks of life who accompanied us when we left. And think of how many prayers and tears were left behind. What do you think the state of anticipation is like for our senate, and the people of Campania, our wives, and our children? I'm certain that the entire crowd is standing at the gates, looking down the road that leads from Rome. What answer will you give us, senators, and what will we bring back to them in their worry and suspense? One kind of answer can bring them safety, victory, light, and freedom. I shudder to think what the other might bring. Therefore, make your decision about us as if we're your future friends and allies, or as if we're people who will cease to exist."