**7.33** No other general was more familiar to the soldier than Consul Valerius. He willingly performed even the most menial tasks among the lowest ranks of the army without any difficulty. Moreover, he also participated in military sports, competing with his equals in contests of speed and strength. He was friendly and humble, winning and losing with grace. He welcomed any competitor and was always kind in his actions and mindful of others in his conversations. He maintained the same conduct in his official duties as he did in his personal life. This endeared him to the entire army, who enthusiastically followed his lead. They marched out of the camp, ready for battle.

The battle, as never before, was fought with equal hope on both sides, and with both sides equally matched in strength and confidence in themselves, but without underestimating the enemy. The Samnites were more ferocious by their new achievements and by their recent double victories of a few days before; while the Romans, on the other hand, drew strength from their four centuries of glory and a victorious career as old as the founding of their City.  Both sides were anxious, as each was facing a new enemy. The battle was an indication of the spirits they carried; they fought so hard that for a time neither side gave ground.

Consul Valerius, seeing that he could not drive them back by force, decided to add fear to the situation and disrupt the enemy's front lines with a cavalry charge. The cavalry failed to break through, though, because the space for them to maneuver was too narrow. So, he rode to the front lines of the legions, dismounted his horse and cried out, "Soldiers, this is a task for us, the infantry. As soon as you see me cutting a path into the enemy's line with my sword, spread out and cut down those who stand in your way. Soon, where their spears are raised and flash in the sun, you'll see a wide path opened by slaughter."

No sooner had he said this when the cavalry, following his orders, moved to the wings, opening a path for the legions to attack the center of the line. The consul was the first to attack the enemy, cutting down the first man he met. Fired up by this spectacle, the soldiers on his right and on his left fought a battle to be remembered. The Samnites stood their ground, even though they took more hits than they gave. 

The battle raged on for some time, with heavy casualties around the Samnite standards. However, there was no flight from any part of their line. It was if they had resolved to die rather than be defeated. As the day wore on and their strength began to wane from fatigue, the Romans, realizing there wasn't much daylight left, summoned their strength with renewed anger and charged at the enemy. This was the turning point of the battle, as the Samnites gave ground and began to retreat. Many were captured or killed, and few would have survived had nightfall not stopped the fighting, preventing a total Roman victory.

And the Romans themselves confessed that they had never met a more obstinate enemy. As for the Samnites, when asked what had first caused them to stubbornly flee, admitted that the fiery determination in the burning eyes of the Romans and their mad faces and furious expressions, instilled more terror than any physical threat. This fear persisted even after the battle, as they fled under the cover of darkness.

The following day, the Romans took over the deserted enemy camp, and the entire population of Campanians poured out of the city, rejoicing.