**7.34** However, the joy of the victory was almost diminished by a great reverse in Samnium by Valerius' colleague.

Consul Cornelius, who had departed from Saticula, carelessly led his army into a mountainous canyon. The area was only accessible through a deep, narrow pass and it had already been surrounded by the enemy. He didn't notice enemy soldiers looming above until it was too late to withdraw his standards safely. While the Samnites waited for the Consul to lead his entire army into the valley, Publius Decius, a military tribune, noticed a hill in the forest that was higher than the rest and overlooked the enemy's camp. It was steep for an army carrying heavy loads to climb, but not for those lightly armed.

He went to the frightened and said, "Do you see that high point above the enemy, Aulus Cornelius? That is the stronghold of our hope and safety. Since the Samnites have foolishly abandoned it, if we take it, we will be safe. Just give me the front ranks, the hastati and principes, of one legion. Once I've reached the top with them, you can proceed without fear and save yourself and the army. The enemy, beneath us and exposed to every missile, won't be able to move without causing their own destruction. Then, either the good fortune of the Roman people or our own bravery will save us."

Praised by the consul and provided with a legion, Decius moved secretly through the forest using hidden paths. The enemy didn't notice him until he was close to his destination. Then, having drawn the gaze and astonishment of all, he remained at the summit of the hill, giving the consul time to move his army to a better position on level ground.

The Samnites, shifting their standards in different directions, had missed both opportunities. They could neither pursue the consul through the same narrow pass where they had previously had him at their mercy, nor could they climb the hill that Decius had taken above them. Their anger was mostly directed at Decius' small force which had taken away their chance to succeed. They were especially infuriated by how close they were and how small of a force they had.

At first, they wanted to surround the hill with armed men to cut off Decius from the consul. Then, they wanted to create a path so they could attack when the Romans descended into the pass. Before they could decide what to do, night fell.

Decius initially hoped that he would fight them from the high ground as they tried to climb the steep hill. But he was surprised that they neither attacked nor, if they were deterred by the uneven ground, surrounded with a rampart. He called the centurions to him and said:

"What ignorance of war and laziness is this? How did these men win against the Sidicinians and Campanians? You see their standards moving around, sometimes gathered in one spot, sometimes spread out. No one is working, when by now we could have been surrounded by a rampart. We will be like them if we stay here longer than necessary. Come with me, so that while there is some light left, we can find out where they have their guards and where we can escape from here."

He carefully observed all these points, dressed in a common soldier's cloak. The centurions he took with him were also dressed as ordinary soldiers so that the enemy wouldn't recognize a commander making the rounds.