**7.35** After setting up the night watch and giving instructions to all the rest, Decius ordered the password \[tessera\] to be distributed. They were to assemble around him at the sound of the second watch's horn, fully armed and in silence.

Once they had gathered silently, as instructed, he addressed them:

"Soldiers," he said, "maintain this silence as you listen to me, and forego the usual military shouts. Once I've fully shared my thoughts with you, those who agree will move quietly to the right.  We will follow the course of action that the majority supports. Now, listen to my plan:"

"The enemy has surrounded us here, but not because we fled or were left behind out of fear. You took this ground through bravery, and now through bravery you must leave it. By coming here, you have protected a valuable Roman army; by breaking out, you'll save yourselves. Despite your small numbers, you have proven yourselves capable of aiding many, while needing help from none. You face an enemy who, just yesterday, through stupidity, failed to take advantage of a golden opportunity to destroy our entire army. Not only this, but they also didn't notice this strategic hill looming over their heads until we had claimed it. With so many thousands of men, none of them stopped our small group from climbing the hill, nor did they build a rampart around us once we had taken the ground, even though there was plenty of daylight left."

"If you've already outsmarted an enemy which was awake and alert, surely you can outsmart them while they're fast asleep. In fact, we must. Our situation is such that I am highlighting our need rather than offering advice. Whether to stay or to leave is no longer a question; Fortune has left you nothing but your weapons and the courage to use them. If we fear the sword more than is fitting for men, let alone Romans, we will stay here and die of hunger and thirst. Our only option is to break out and leave. We must do this either by day or by night."

"But consider this: if we wait for daylight, what hope do we have that the enemy, who have now surrounded the hill on all sides, won't trap us by digging a rampart? If now is the best time for a breakout, as it seems to be, then this is undoubtedly the most suitable hour of the night. You gathered here at the signal of the second watch, a time when most people are in their deepest sleep. You'll move through their sleeping bodies, either silently moving unnoticed or ready to strike fear into them if they detect you, with a sudden shout. Just follow me, as you have done before. I'll follow the same fortune that led us here."

"Those of you who agree with this plan, come, move to the right."