**5.10** The new consular tribunes were Lucius Valerius Potitus for the fourth time, Marcus Furius Camillus, for the second time, Marcus Aemilius Mamercinus for the third time, Gnaeus Cornelius Cossus for the second time, Caeso Fabius Ambustus, and Lucius Julius Iullus for the third time. During their year, many tasks were carried out both domestically and abroad.

There was a complicated war happening simultaneously in Veii, Capena, Falerii, and among the Volscians, with the aim of Rome reclaiming Anxur back from the enemy.

At the same time, in Rome, there was a simultaneous fight due to the military draft and the collection of a tax.

There was also a dispute over the co-optation of plebeian tribunes, and significant unrest over the trials of the two consular tribunes from the year before.

The new consular tribunes ensured that the draft was held, and not only were young men enlisted, but older men were also required to register to serve as guards for the City. However, as the number of soldiers increased, so did the need for more money for their pay. They tried to collect this money through a tax, but it was paid with heavy resistance by those who remained at home, as they were the ones who were guarding the City and also had to perform military service and serve the Republic.

The plebeian tribunes, through giving inflammatory speeches, made these burdens seem even more severe, claiming that the soldiers' pay was established to exhaust half of the plebeians through military service and the other half through taxation. A single war in Veii had been ongoing for three years, and it was deliberately handled badly with the intention of prolonging it. Armies had been raised for four different wars at one draft; young boys and old men were being now pulled from their homes. Now there was no distinction between summer and winter, so there was never any break for the unfortunate plebeians who now were required to pay taxes.

And even when they finished their service, worn out from fighting, from wounds, and finally, old age, they return home to find everything broken and the fields uncultivated due to their long absence. But they're expected to pay the war tax from their depleted household estate, and repay their military pay as if they had received it on loan, and now they must return it to the Republic, with interest many times over.

Carrying the weight of the draft and the tax, the plebeians were preoccupied with other, more pressing matters such that, this year, they did not turn out to vote. The number of plebeian tribunes couldn't be filled at the elections. Attempts were made to co-opt patricians for the empty positions. When this failed outright, it was nevertheless arranged, in an attempt to weaken the Trebonian Law forbidding the practice, that Gaius Lacerius and Marcus Acutius were co-opted, appointed by existing plebeian tribunes, to become plebeian tribunes. Without a doubt, this was due to the influence of the patricians.