**5.8** The subsequent year saw six consular tribunes, including Gaius Servilius Ahala for the third time, Quintus Servilius, Lucius Verginius, Quintus Sulpicius, Aulus Manlius for the second time, and Manius Sergius also for the second time.

During their tenure, since the focus was on the Veiian war, the garrison at Anxur fell into neglect because the soldiers were being given liberal leave privileges. Since Volscian traders were openly welcomed and had unrestricted entry, the guards at the gate were soon overpowered and the town was taken. Few soldiers were lost because, except for the sick, they were all busy engaging in trade throughout the countryside and neighboring towns like camp-followers.

The situation at Veii, the primary concern of the public, wasn't any better. The Roman commanders were more engaged in fighting with each other than with fighting the enemy, whose forces were enlarged by the unexpected arrival of the Capenates and the Faliscans. These two states of the Etruscans, being geographically close, feared that if Veii fell, they would be the next targets of the Romans. The Faliscans had an added worry of their own, having already stirred up Roman anger by being involved in the previous war on behalf of Fidenae. After sending envoys back and forth, the Faliscans swore mutual allegiance by oath with the Capenates and together they surprised the Romans by marching their armies to Veii.

It happened in that region where Manius Sergius, the consular tribune, was in command, causing great terror, as the Romans feared that the entire body of Etruscan tribes were mobilizing against them. The Veientes, believing the same thing, felt courageous by what was happening and stormed out of the city. Thus, the Roman camp was now being attacked from both sides in a precarious battle. As they ran back and forth moving their standards, they were unable to keep the Veientes within their fortifications, or to repel the assault upon their own defenses and protect themselves from the enemy outside. Their only hope was to receive aid from the larger camp, allowing different legions to fight against the Capenates and Faliscans on one side, while others could fight against the Veii. However, Consular Tribune Verginius, who privately hated and opposed Consular Tribune Sergius, was in command of that larger camp. When he received word that most of the forts were under attack, the fortifications were overrun, and the enemy was pouring in from both sides, he kept his men on standby, stating that if assistance was needed, his colleague would request it.

The arrogance of Verginius was matched by the stubbornness of Sergius, as Sergius chose to be defeated by the enemy rather than seek help from an adversary. For a long time, the soldiers were caught between the two positions and were being slaughtered, suffering heavy losses. Eventually, a small number, abandoning the fortifications, managed to reach the larger camp, while the rest, including Sergius, himself, fled back to Rome.

Once in Rome, Sergius blamed his colleague for the defeat. It was decided that Verginius should be summoned from the camp and the legates should take command in the interim. The matter was then debated in the Senate, and a quarrel broke out between Sergius and Verginius who hurled accusations at each other. Few in the Senate were concerned with the good of the Republic, with most favoring one or the other based on personal bias or influence.