**5.9** From the viewpoint of the leading senators, the humiliating defeat was either due to the commanders' incompetence or due to simple bad luck. Regardless, they decided that elections should not be postponed, and new consular tribunes should be elected immediately so that they could enter into office on the first of October.

As others began to express their agreement with this view, the other consular tribunes didn't resist. However, Sergius and Verginius, who were clearly the reason for the Senate's dissatisfaction with that year's officials, initially resisted the disgrace, then protested against the Senate's decree. They wouldn't leave office before December thirteenth, they declared, the traditional day for assuming official duties. At this point, the plebeian tribunes, who had reluctantly remained silent during the general agreement and successful state of public affairs, suddenly started to threaten the consular tribunes. Unless they complied with the Senate's order, they warned, the consular tribunes would be imprisoned.

Then Gaius Servilius Ahala, a consular tribune, snapped back, "As far as you are concerned, plebeian tribunes, I would gladly test if your threats had as much legal force as you possess courage to actually carry them out. We know it's sacrilegious to oppose the authority of the Senate. Stop trying to cause trouble during our disputes. My colleagues will either do what the Senate deems appropriate or, if they stubbornly refuse, I'll immediately appoint a dictator who will force them to leave office."

This speech was universally approved, and the patricians were glad that another greater power had been found to control the officials without the intimidation of the plebeian tribunes. Sergius and Verginius, the reluctant consular tribunes, overcome by the unanimous will of all, conducted the elections for new consular tribunes who would start their office on the first of October, and they, themselves, resigned their office before that day.