**4.3** At the same time that these Senate discussions were happening, Tribune Canuleius passionately spoke in favor of his laws and against the consuls as follows:

"I've often noticed how much the patricians look down on you, Quirites. They think you aren't worthy to live in the same city and within the same walls as them. I've noticed this before, but this is especially clear now, as they strongly oppose our proposals. What are we doing other than reminding them that we are their fellow citizens? Even though we don't have the same wealth and power, we still live in the same City. On the one hand, we're asking for the right to intermarry, a right usually given to neighbors and foreigners. We have even given the right of citizenship, which is much more than the right of intermarriage, to our conquered enemies."

"On the other hand, we aren't proposing anything new. We're simply reclaiming and demanding what belongs to the people. The Roman people should be able to bestow honors on whomever they please. Why have the patricians caused a commotion, raising heaven and earth about this? Why did they come very close to attacking me in the Senate, just now, saying that they had no problem with laying hands on me, threatening to violate the sacrosanct authority of the tribunes?"

"If the Roman people are free to vote for whomever they choose to elect as consul, then a plebeian, worthy of the highest office shouldn't be denied the hope of achieving that honor. Will the City fall? Will the Republic collapse? What difference does it make if the consul is a plebeian? It isn't the same as proposing a slave or a freedman to be consul."

"Do you see how little they think of you? The patricians would take away your right to this sunlight if they could. They're angry that you breathe, that you speak, that you look like humans. The patricians even say, if the gods permit, it's a sacrilege for a plebeian to be made consul! Well, even though we plebeians aren't allowed to read the official calendars and records \[fasti\], or the commentaries of the Pontiffs, are we really so ignorant not to know what all foreigners know: that consuls have replaced kings and they have the powers and privileges that were previously given to kings."

"Do they think we have never heard that Numa Pompilius, who wasn't a patrician or even a citizen of Rome, was once called from the Sabine nation by order of the people, with the Senate's approval, and then made king in Rome? That Lucius Tarquinius Priscus wasn't Roman or even of the Italian race? No, he was the son of Damaratus of Corinth, an immigrant from Tarquinii, and he was made king while Ancus' sons were still alive! How about Servius Tullius, born of a captive from Corniculum, with no father and a slave mother, who became king through his abilities and merits? Not to mention Titus Tatius, the Sabine with whom Romulus, the founder of our City, shared his power as co-rulers!"

"Therefore, while no race in which virtue shone forth was despised, the Roman empire grew. Why do you dislike the idea of a plebeian consul now? Your ancestors had no issues with foreigners as their king. And, even after the kings were expelled, the City was still not closed to foreigners who showed merit. The state certainly admitted the Claudian family from the Sabine nation after the expulsion of the Sabine kings, not only into citizenship but also as patricians. So if a man is a foreigner, he may become a patrician, and then a consul. But if he is a Roman citizen and a plebeian, should he be denied any hope of becoming consul? Don't we think it's possible for a plebeian to be brave and energetic, capable of excelling in peace and war, like Numa Pompilius, Tarquinius Priscus, and Servius Tullius? If such a person appears, shall we not allow him to handle the government of the Republic? Or would we rather have consuls like the decemvirs, incredible monsters who were, nevertheless, all patricians? Should we reject men who have the best qualities we loved in our Roman kings just because they're self-made?"