**4.4** Canuleius continued, "Someone might argue that no plebeian has been consul since the kings were expelled. So what? Should we never introduce new ideas? Should we never try things that haven't been done before, especially in a new state where many things haven't yet been tried? Should we not adopt useful measures just because they're new?"

"During Romulus's reign, there were no pontiffs or augurs. Numa Pompilius appointed them. There was no census in the state, nor the description of centuries and classes. Servius Tullius introduced these. Consuls did not exist until after the kings were expelled. The power and name of a dictator did not exist until it was established among the senators. There were no plebeian tribunes, no aediles, and no quaestors until it was decided that these officers should be appointed. In the last ten years, we both created decemvirs to compile laws and then abolished the entire office."

"In a City destined for eternal existence and growing to an immense size, there must be new civil offices, new priesthoods, and new rights of families and individuals. Who doubts this? Who doubts that nothing needs to change?"

"This very idea that patricians and plebeians shouldn't intermarry was wickedly introduced by the decemvirs in recent years, greatly harming the plebeians and damaging the public good. Is there a greater insult than to consider an entire segment of the population contaminated and filthy, unworthy of marriage? This is like being exiled and banished within the same city walls."

"The patricians want to prevent us from mixing with them through marriage or blood relations. They don't want our blood to mix with theirs. Yet most of you patricians are descendants of Albans and Sabines and your nobility wasn't received by birth or by blood but merely by being co-opted into the patricians, selected either by kings, themselves, or appointed by the people after the kings were expelled."

"Could you not keep your own blood lines pure by regulating it yourselves? You, yourselves, could choose not to marry plebeians. You, yourselves, could choose to not let your daughters or sisters marry outside the patricians. No plebeian would force a patrician maiden to marry him. Such debauchery belongs to the patricians. No one would force anyone to enter a marriage contract against their will. But to prevent such a thing by law, to forbid the intermarriage between patricians and plebeians? This is an insult to the plebeians."

"Why not make a law that there should be no intermarriage between rich people and poor people? It has always been a private matter for a woman to marry into whatever family her fiancé is in and, likewise, for a man to marry into whatever family his fiancée is in. But you have turned this understanding into a tyrannical law, breaking the bonds of civil society and splitting one state into two."

"How about make a law that a plebeian shouldn't live next to a patrician? That he shouldn't walk on the same road as he walks? That he shouldn't attend the same banquet as he does? That he shouldn't stand in the same Forum? What difference does it make if a patrician man marries a plebeian woman, or a plebeian man marries a patrician woman? What right is changed by this? The children take the father's status, of course."

"We gain nothing by allowing intermarriage with you except to be considered as human beings and as fellow citizens. You lose nothing, either. The only reason you oppose this is because you take pleasure in insulting and humiliating us."