**4.17** During the consular tribunes' year, Fidenae, a Roman colony, defected to the leadership of Lars Tolumnius, king of the Veientes.

This rebellion was accompanied by a more serious crime. Under Tolumnius' orders, the Fidenates executed Gaius Fulcinius, Cloelius Tullus, Spurius Antius, and Lucius Roscius. These men were Roman ambassadors who had come to investigate the defection.

In an attempt to downplay the king's crime, some argue that the king made an ambiguous statement after a lucky dice throw so that it seemed he had given the order to kill. This was misinterpreted by the Fidenates and was the cause of the ambassadors' death. I find this explanation unbelievable. For one thing, when the Fidenates, his new allies, came to consult him as to committing a murder in violation of the Law of Nations, Tolumnius should have at least stopped his dice game, or afterwards, should have attributed it to a misunderstanding. Instead, it's more plausible that he wanted the Fidenates, deeply ashamed by what they had done, to feel bound to him with no hope of ever reconciling with the Romans.

Statues of the murdered ambassadors were erected on the Rostra of the Forum at public expense. A bitter conflict was now imminent with the Veientes and the Fidenates, not just because they were neighboring peoples, but because now they had committed a vile act by murdering Roman ambassadors.

As a result, the plebeians and their tribunes were quiet, anxiously focused on the general welfare. There was no disagreement over the election of consuls, and Marcus Geganius Macerinus was elected for a third term with Lucius Sergius Fidenas. I believe Consul Fidenas was presumably named after the war he later led, for he was the first to win in this second battle against Lars Tolumnius on this side of the Anio, but the victory wasn't without bloodshed.

The citizens' grief from losing Roman lives outweighed the happiness of defeating the enemy. In response, as is usual in a situation like this, the Senate ordered the appointment of Mamercus Aemilius as Dictator. As his Master of the Horse, he named a man who had been his colleague the year before, when they had both been consular tribunes, namely Lucius Quinctius Cincinnatus, a young man worthy of his famous father. The consuls added experienced veteran centurions to the draft and replaced those lost in the recent battle. Dictator Aemilius ordered Lucius Quinctius Capitolinus and Marcus Fabius Vibulanus to serve as his legates or lieutenants general.

These combined forces and the experienced Dictator leading them pushed the enemy from Roman territory across the Anio to the other side of the river toward Fidenae. They enemy withdrew, taking control of the hills between Fidenae and the Anio River where they moved their camp and did not descend into the plains until the legions of Etruscans from Falerii, also known as Faliscans, came to their aid. When the Faliscans arrived, they set up their camp outside the walls of Fidenae.

Dictator Aemilius positioned his forces not far from there at the junction of the two rivers, the Tiber and the Anio, extending the construction of his fortifications as far as possible from one river to the other. The next day, the Dictator lined up his army for battle.