**4.18** There was a diversity of opinion among the enemies. The men of Falerii, tired of fighting wars far from home and being confident in their own abilities, strongly demanded a battle. The Veientes and Fidenates, however, wanted to prolong and extend the war. Lars Tolumnius, although he preferred the opinion of his own men to prolong the war, announced that he would engage in battle the next day, in case the Faliscans became discontented and refused to fight through a long campaign.

The Dictator and the Romans gained confidence because the enemy had declined to battle. And on the next day, as the Roman soldiers were growling that unless they were given a chance to fight, they would storm the enemy's camp and the city themselves, the battle lines of both sides were moved into the middle of the plain between the two camps.

The Veientes, who had more soldiers, sent troops around the back of the hills to attack the Roman camp while the battle happened. The armies of the three allied states were arranged so that the Veientes were on the right wing, the Faliscans on the left, and the Fidenates in the center.

The Dictator placed his standards on the right wing against the Faliscans, Quinctius Capitolinus directed his standards on the left against the Veientes, and the Master of the Horse advanced in front of the central line with the cavalry against the Fidenates.

For a brief period, everything was silent and calm. The Etruscans were reluctant to fight unless they were forced to. The Dictator waited for a pre-arranged signal to be raised from the Citadel in Rome to be given by the augurs as soon as the birds had given a positive sign.

Immediately upon seeing the signal, he let loose the cavalry, who shouted loudly and moved forward to attack the Fidenates first. The infantry line followed, fighting fiercely. The Etruscan legions couldn't withstand the Romans' charge in any area. The enemy's cavalry put up the most resistance. And Lars Tolumnius, by far the strongest horseman, extended the battle by skillfully avoiding the Romans while attacking them as they scattered in all directions for the pursuit.