**4.19** Among the Roman cavalry was Aulus Cornelius Cossus, a military tribune. He was known for his good looks, bravery, and physical strength. Proud of his name, which was already famous when he inherited it, he left it to his descendants with even more distinction. Cossus noticed that wherever Lars Tolumnius went, the Roman troops retreated in alarm.

Recognizing Tolumnius by his royal attire, flying along the whole line of infantry, he shouted, "Is this the one who breaks treaties and violates the Law of Nations? If it's the will of the gods that anything sacred should exist on Earth, I will kill this man and offer him as a sacrifice to the spirits of the murdered ambassadors." He spurred his horse and charged at Tolumnius with his spear. After striking and knocking him off his horse, he quickly vaulted off his own horse using his spear for support. As the king tried to get up, he struck him with the boss of his shield, pushing him back and stabbed him repeatedly with his spear until the king was pinned to the ground. He then stripped the spoils from the dead body, cut off his head, and carried it on his spear, scattering the terrified enemy at the death of their king.

The enemy's cavalry, which had been the only force making the battle uncertain, was also scattered. Dictator Aemilius chased the fleeing enemy legions and forced them back to their camp, slaughtering many in the camp. Most of the Fidenates, familiar with the area, escaped to the mountains. Cornelius Cossus crossed the Tiber River with the Roman cavalry and took a large amount of loot from the Veiian territory back to the City.

During the battle, there was also a fight at the Roman camp against a group of Veientes that Tolumnius had previously sent to the camp. The Roman legate, Fabius Vibulanus, initially defended his lines in a circular entrenchment. Then, while the Veientes were focused trying to break through the entrenchment, Fabius suddenly attacked with veteran triarii through one the main camp gates \[porta principalis\]. The unexpected sortie caused a panic among the Veientes, and they scattered. There was less killing because there were fewer of them, but their flight was just as chaotic as it had been on the battlefield.