**4.20** Dictator Aemilius and the Roman army were victorious on all fronts. Following a decree from the Senate and the command of the people, he returned to the city in Triumph.

By far the greatest spectacle of the Triumph was Aulus Cornelius Cossus, who carried the spoils \[spolia opima\] of King Lars Tolumnius, whom he had killed. The soldiers sang their crude verses about him, praising him as the equal of Romulus. He presented these spoils with a solemn dedication in the Temple of Jupiter Feretrius, near Romulus' spoils, which were called spolia opima prima because Romulus' spoils were the first. Cossus drew the attention of all the citizens from the Dictator's chariot to himself, and almost alone carried off the glory of that day's celebration. Dictator Aemilius offered a golden crown, weighing a pound, to Jupiter on the Capitoline Hill. This was done at the public's expense, by order of the people.

Following previous historians, I've portrayed Aulus Cornelius Cossus as a military tribune when he brought his spoils, spolia opima secunda, to the Temple of Jupiter Feretrius. Those spoils are rightly considered opima when one commander has taken them from an enemy commander. We call someone a commander under whose auspices a war is conducted. However, the inscription upon the spoils themselves, today, says that Cossus was consul when he took them, contradicting both me and the other writers.

When I heard that Augustus Caesar, the builder or restorer of all our temples, had entered the Temple of Jupiter Feretrius, which he had rebuilt after it had been deteriorating with age, and personally read that inscription on Cossus' linen breastplate, I thought it would be almost sacrilegious to deny Cossus of such a testimony about his spoils since it's from Augustus Caesar, the renovator of the temple, himself.

Whether the mistake is due to the very ancient annals or the Linen Books of the magistrates, which are kept in the Temple of Moneta and which Licinius Macer repeatedly cites as authorities, is up for debate. These books have Aulus Cornelius Cossus as Consul with Titus Quinctius Poenus, seven years after this event. Everyone can form their own opinion on this.

There is additional proof that a battle so famous could not be moved to that year. The three years surrounding Aulus Cornelius Cossus' consulship were completely free from war due to a pestilence and a grain shortage. Some annals, as if in mourning, only list the names of the consuls.

The third year after Cossus' consulship has him as a consular tribune. In the same year, he was Master of the Horse and fought another notable cavalry battle. Speculation is open on the matter, but in my opinion, idle guesses can be used to support any view. The hero of the fight, having placed the recent spoils in the sacred repository and having Jupiter himself and Romulus as witnesses, who wouldn't be easily fooled by a false inscription, called himself "Aulus Cornelius Cossus, Consul."