**8.1** The consuls this year were Gaius Plautius, serving for the second time, and Lucius Aemilius Mamercinus.

Representatives from Setia and Norba came to Rome, reporting the rebellion of the people of Privernum and bringing grievances about the defeat they had suffered. News was also reported that the Volscian army, under the leadership of the people of Antium, had positioned themselves at Satricum. Both wars were assigned to Consul Plautius by lot.

Consul Plautius first marched to Privernum and immediately engaged in battle. The enemy was defeated with little resistance, the town was captured and then returned to the Privernians, but with a strong Roman garrison stationed there. Two-thirds of their land was confiscated.

The victorious army then moved to Satricum to confront the Antiates. A terrible battle ensued with heavy casualties on both sides until a sudden storm forced the combatants to separate, leaving the outcome uncertain. The Romans, not exhausted by the inconclusive battle, prepared to fight again the next day. But the Volscians, after counting the men they had lost in battle, lacked the morale to risk another battle. Defeated, they hurriedly retreated to Antium during the night in a state of panic, leaving behind their wounded and a part of their baggage. A great number of weapons was found among the enemy dead and inside their deserted camp. The Consul announced that he was dedicating the spoils to Lua Mater, and he laid waste to the enemy's territory all the way to the sea.

The other consul, Lucius Aemilius, entered Sabine territory and found no Samnite camp or legions anywhere to oppose him. As he wreaked havoc on their lands, by sword and fire, Samnite ambassadors approached him seeking peace. They were turned away and, instead, went to the Senate, where they were granted permission to speak.

Setting aside their proud spirits, the ambassadors asked the Romans for peace and for the right to war against the Sidicinians. Such requests were just, they argued, because they had formed an alliance with the Romans when times were good, unlike the Campanians who had sought Roman friendship only in times of emergency. Moreover, they were fighting the Sidicinians, who had always been their enemies and had never been friends of the Romans. They were neither under the protection nor the authority of the Roman people.