**8.2** Tiberius Aemilius, the praetor, laid the demands of the Samnites before the Senate, and they ultimately decided to renew the treaty with the Samnites. In his reply to the Samnite ambassadors, the praetor said that the Romans weren't to blame for the end of their friendship; since the Samnites were now tired of the war they themselves had started, the Romans had no objection in renewing the treaty. Regarding the Sidicinians, the Romans wouldn't interfere with the Samnites having the freedom to decide about with whom they wanted to make peace or war.

After the treaty was agreed upon, the ambassadors returned home, and the Roman army was quickly withdrawn. The army received a year's pay and three months' worth of grain, arranged by the Consul to allow time for a truce until the ambassadors returned.

The Samnites, using the same forces they had used against the Romans, confidently marched against the Sidicinians, hoping to quickly take possession of the enemy city. The Sidicinians had anticipated this, so they tried to surrender to the Romans. When the Senate rejected their offer as too late and made out of desperation, the Sidicinians turned to the Latins, who had already taken up arms on their own, to join them. Also, the Campanians, who remembered the harm done by the Samnites more than the kindness of the Romans, entered the conflict. One large army, made up of these states, entered Samnite territory under a Latin general.

They caused more harm through looting than through battles. Even though the Latins were superior in battle, they chose to leave enemy territory to avoid fighting too often. This gave the Samnites a chance to send ambassadors to Rome. They complained to the Senate that they were being treated as enemies, even though they were now allies. Humbly, they asked that the Romans consider their victory sufficient, having already taken Campania and the Sidicini from them, and not to allow them to be defeated by the most cowardly of nations. They begged the Romans to help them stop the Latins and Campanians from invading their territory. If the Romans truly had authority over these states, they said, they should stop them from invading Samnium. If not, they should use force.

The Senate's response was unclear. They were embarrassed to admit that they didn't have control over the Latins. Likewise, they were also afraid that criticizing them might alienate them. The Campanians were different. In their case, they had surrendered to the Romans, not made a treaty. So, the Campanians had to stay out of the conflict, whether they wanted to or not. The treaty with the Latins didn't prevent them from going to war with anyone they chose.