**8.7** Among the other military leaders who had been dispatched in various directions to scout, Titus Manlius, the son of the Consul, arrived with his troop at the rear of the enemy's camp. They were so close that they were barely a spear's throw away from the nearest post. 

In that location, there were some Tusculan cavalry, led by Geminus Maecius, a man renowned among his people for his noble birth and heroic deeds. When he spotted the Roman cavalry, particularly the consul's son who was prominent among them (for they all knew each other and were certainly illustrious men), he called out, "Romans, do you plan to fight the Latins and their allies with just one squadron? What will your consuls and their two armies be doing in the meantime?"

Manlius responded, "They'll arrive in due time, and Jupiter himself will be with them, witnessing the treaties you have broken. He's stronger and more powerful. If we fought you at Lake Regillus until you were exhausted, we will do the same here, ensuring that our battle lines and clashing standards won't be a pleasant experience for you."

In response, Maecius, moving some distance from his own cavalry group, challenged Manlius saying, "Until that day comes when your armies are mobilized with great effort, in the meantime, would you like to meet in single combat – man to man? The outcome of our fight will show how much a Latin horseman surpasses a Roman horseman."

The young Manlius, whether feeling anger, or embarrassment at refusing the challenge, or the irresistible force of destiny, forgot his father's orders and the consuls' decree, and ran headlong into the duel, a contest in which neither victory nor defeat mattered to him. The other horsemen moved away, leaving a clear space for the two to charge at each other.

Spurring their horses on, they each rushed toward each other with their leveled spears. Manlius' spear passed over his opponent's helmet, while Maecius' spear passed over the neck of Manlius' horse. As they circled around for another attack, Manlius rose up and managed to lodge his spear between his horse's ears. The pain caused the horse to rear up and violently shake its head, throwing off its rider. As Maecius tried to get up, leaning on his spear and shield, Manlius drove his sword into his throat, the blade piercing through his ribs and emerging from his back, pinning him to the ground.

Manlius collected the spoils from the body and returned to his own men. With joyful cheers, he went with his company to the camp and then to the headquarters of his father. He was unsure of his fate and future, whether he had earned praise or punishment. "Father," he said, "So that all may truly call me your son, I bring you these equestrian spoils taken from a slain enemy. I was challenged and I killed my opponent."

Upon hearing this, the Consul immediately turned away from his son and ordered the trumpet to summon a general assembly.

When the soldiers had gathered, he said to his son, "Titus Manlius, you have shown no respect for consular authority. You did not respect your father's command by fighting the enemy outside of formation. You defied my orders. By doing what you have done, you have undermined the military discipline that has upheld Roman power to this day. You have left me with a bitter choice: choosing between forgetting the republic or forgetting my own son. Let us, rather than the republic, suffer for our faults. We will be a grim example, but a useful one, for future generations."

"As much as my natural love for my son as well as the brilliance of the deed that led him astray, it was a false sense of glory. If your death is what it takes to uphold the authority of the consuls, or if forgiving you would mean forever undermining that authority, I don't think that even you, if you truly are my son, would refuse to restore by punishment the military discipline that has been lost through your actions. Go, lictor, bind him to the stake."

Everyone fell silent, frozen by the savagery of the sentence, and looking at the axe as if it were drawn against themselves. Fear, more than obedience, kept them silent. As they stood, watching in horror as blood spurted from the young man's severed neck, a loud cry broke out. Nobody could hold back their tears, or their curses.

The young man's body, covered with the spoils of his victory, was burned on a pyre outside the rampart, with all the military honors that could be bestowed on a soldier's funeral. From then on, the "Manlian Orders" would remain not only terrifying in the present, but also as a harsh precedent for the future.