**5.42** But either not all the Gauls were eager to destroy the city completely, or the leaders of the Gauls had decided to set certain fires deliberately to terrorize the Romans, hoping that they would surrender out of love for their homes and city. Not all the buildings were burned. Some were left standing so that they might be used as a bargaining tool. As a result, the fires on the first day didn't spread randomly or widely as might typically occur in a captured city.

The Romans, watching from the Citadel, saw the City teeming with enemies running aimlessly through every street, a fresh disaster happening down one street or another. They could barely mentally process it, as even their ears and eyes could not follow such incredible destruction happening all at once.

The Romans in the Citadel turned their hearts and eyes and minds in terror to everything as they heard the shouts of the enemy, the wailing of women and children, the roar of flames, and the crash of collapsing roofs. They felt as if Fortune had placed them there as witnesses to the spectacle of Rome dying, leaving them with nothing else but their lives to fight for.

In many ways, the Romans' situation was worse than anyone else who had ever been under siege, because they were entirely cut off from their City, while being besieged within it, and were forced to watch everything they owned fall into enemy hands.

The night that followed such a horrendous day brought no relief, nor did the day that succeeded that restless night. Each day brought new disasters. Despite feeling overwhelmed by all they were seeing, they remained determined to defend their small, poorly supplied hill that preserved their liberty, even if everything else in Rome was leveled with flames and in ruins. As the same events continued to happen day after day, they became used to their misfortune and focused only on the swords in their hands and their determination to fight, which they saw as their last hope.