**2.36** In Rome, plans were underway to repeat the Great Games.

During the morning before the previous games, a family head punished his slave by putting a cattle yoke on him and forcing him to run through the middle of the Circus Maximus while beating him. This all happened right before the performance began. Afterward, the games began as usual, just as if there were no religious significance as to what had just happened.

Not long after, a plebeian named Titus Latinius had a dream where Jupiter told him that the presiding official of the games displeased him. Unless they were redone on an equally grand scale, the City would be in danger. He instructed Latinius to relay this message to the consuls. Although he was somewhat superstitious, Latinius' respect for the authority of the magistrates overpowered his religious fear. If it weren't true, he worried, he would become a joke among the people.

This hesitation proved costly, as he lost his son within a few days. To remove any doubt about the cause of this tragedy, the same apparition appeared to him again. It seemed to ask him if he had received enough punishment for his disregard of the deity and warned of a heavier punishment unless he immediately delivered the message to the consuls. Despite the situation becoming more urgent, Latinius continued to hesitate and delay. He was then struck by partial paralysis. This finally awakened him to the gods' anger.

Exhausted by his past sufferings and the threats of more to come, he called a meeting of his friends and told them everything he had seen and heard, including Jupiter's repeated appearances in his dreams and the divine threats being proven true by his own misfortunes. With the unanimous agreement of everyone at the meeting, he was carried in a litter to the consuls in the Forum. From there, he was taken to the Senate, where he relayed the same information to the senators. To everyone's astonishment, another miracle occurred. Latinius, who had been carried into the Senate because he was unable to use any of his limbs, is said to have walked home on his own after he had fulfilled his duty.