**2.22** At the time of the wars against the Latins, the Volscians had been neutral. They were neither at peace with Rome nor at war with it. The Volscians prepared to support the Latins with additional troops, and they would have done so had Dictator Postumius not acted swiftly to prevent this. His quick actions were aimed at preventing a situation where Romans would have to fight both the Latins and the Volscians simultaneously. Angrily, the Roman consuls led their armies into Volscian territory preemptively and surprised the Volscians, who hadn't anticipated any punishment for their intentions. They offered three-hundred children of their nobility from Cora and Pometia as hostages. Consequently, the Roman legions withdrew without any battle.

Shortly afterward, the Volscians stopped fearing more repercussions and returned back to their usual deceit. They secretly prepared for war again, this time bringing the Hernicians in as allies and sending out ambassadors in all directions to agitate the other Latins into rebellion, as well. However, with the recent defeat at Lake Regillus still on their minds, the Latins instead became enraged and could barely keep from attacking the ambassadors as they suggested taking up arms against the Romans yet again. The Latins, disgusted, arrested the Volscian ambassadors and brought them to Rome. There, they presented them to the consuls and informed them that the Volscians and Hernicians were preparing for war against them.

When the matter was referred to the Senate, they were so grateful that they released six-thousand prisoners back to the Latins and approved treaty negotiations, which had previously been almost entirely denied, to the incoming magistrates.

The Latins were pleased with these actions, and those who had advocated for this peaceful resolution were highly regarded. They sent a golden crown as an offering to Jupiter on the Capitoline Hill. Along with the Latin ambassadors who brought this offering, a large crowd of formerly enslaved Latin prisoners who had been released came with them and returned to their Roman host families. They visited the homes of those who had kept them during their captivity, expressing thanks for their humane treatment during such a difficult time. They then established friendly relations. Never had the Latin name been more closely tied to the Roman state, either through public or private connections.