**3.1** After Antium was captured, Titus Aemilius for the second time, and Quintus Fabius were chosen as consuls. This Quintus Fabius was the lone survivor after the massacre at Cremera destroyed the rest of his family.

In his previous term, Consul Aemilius had advocated for distributing land that had been captured to the plebeians. So, in his second term, those who supported this idea of the Agrarian Law were hopeful that it would be passed. The tribunes pursued the matter, believing that now they could achieve their goal with the support of at least one consul. Aemilius remained unchanged in his beliefs. The landowners and a significant portion of the patricians complained that Consul Aemilius, as the state's leader, was acting like a tribune trying to grow his popularity by distributing property belonging to others. This shifted the blame for the entire situation from the tribunes to the consul.

A fierce dispute grew, but Consul Fabius resolved the issue in a way that was acceptable to both sides: a large quantity of land was taken from the Volscians under the leadership of Titus Quinctius Capitolinus the previous year. This land could be used to establish a colony at Antium, which, as a seaport town not far from Rome, was a suitable city for the purpose. The plebeians could take over farms without causing the landholders to complain and the city could remain peaceful.

This plan was accepted. Fabius appointed Titus Quinctius, Aulus Verginius, and Publius Furius as triumvirs to distribute the land. Those who wanted land were instructed to register their names. However, the implementation of the plan led to dissatisfaction, as is often the case. Not many plebeians registered, so Volscian colonists were added to make up the numbers. The majority of the plebeians preferred land inside Roman territory rather than accept it on the fringes of the Republic.

Also, this year, the Aequians asked Consul Fabius for peace, as he was sent there with an army, but the Aequians themselves violated it by suddenly invading the Latin territory.