**3.2** In the next year, Quintus Servilius, who was Consul with Spurius Postumius, was dispatched to confront the Aequians. He established his camp in the Latin territory.

Due to an epidemic, the army was ordered to stay within the camp for some necessary rest.

The conflict extended into the third year, with Quintus Fabius Vibulanus, for the second time, and Titus Quinctius Capitolinus Barbatus, for the third time, as consuls.

Consul Fabius was given the province by a special commission because, as the previous victor, he had granted peace to the Aequians. He was confident that his reputation would compel the Aequians to surrender, so he sent ambassadors to their council, instructing them to say that Quintus Fabius had previously brought peace from Aequi to Rome, and now he'll bring war from Rome to Aequi with the same armed right hand that had previously brought peace to them. As the gods are now witnesses to their treachery and deceit, they'll soon punish those who have broken their promises. And yet, he wishes that the Aequians would repent voluntarily rather than endure the anger of an enemy. If the Aequians repent, they could rely on the same mercy they had previously experienced. If the Aequians continue to break their promises, they'll be at war with angry gods rather than just their earthly enemies. However, this message had little impact on the Aequians, the ambassadors were almost assaulted and an army was dispatched to Algidum to fight the Romans.

When this news reached Rome, the insult of the situation, rather than the danger, drove Consul Quinctius Fabius to leave the City. The two consular armies advanced against the enemy in battle formation, ready to engage immediately. However, as the day was ending and no fighting had occurred, a soldier from the Aequian front line taunted the Romans, "You Romans are just showing off, not actually fighting. You drew up battle lines and night is about to fall. We need more hours of daylight for the battle. Tomorrow at sunrise, form your battle line again. Don't worry; there will be plenty of opportunity for fighting."

Infuriated, the Roman soldiers returned to their camp to wait until the next day. They found the approaching night long, as it delayed the impending battle. Still, they refreshed themselves with food and sleep until, at dawn, the Romans were the first to take their positions on the battlefield and wait for the Aequians. Finally, the Aequians appeared, as well.

The battle was fierce on both sides. The Romans fought with anger and hatred, while the Aequians, aware that this was their own fault and despairing of ever being trusted again, were forced to make desperate efforts. Yet the Aequians couldn't withstand the Roman troops.

When the Aequians retreated to their own territories, their angry soldiers were still unwilling to make peace and criticized their leadership. "Our interests have been risked in one formal battle," they argued, "the kind of combat in which the Romans excelled. We're better suited for raids and invasions. Our smaller groups operating in different directions would wage war more effectively than one large, unwieldy army."