**3.3** After leaving a garrison at their camp, the Aequians set out and attacked the Roman territory with such intensity that it caused fear even in the City. The surprise of the attack caused even more alarm, as no one expected that a defeated enemy, almost trapped in their camp, would even think of raiding. Frightened farmers poured through the City gates, shouting with exaggeration that it wasn't just a simple raid, nor small groups of raiders, but entire armies and legions of the enemy were advancing straight for the City, ready to attack. Those who were closest to the gates spread the news, exaggerating even more what they heard from the farmers, even though it was uncertain and therefore more alarming. The rush and confused noise of those calling for defense was like the panic of a city under attack.

By chance, Consul Quinctius had just returned to Rome from Algidum, which helped to calm their fears. After quieting the chaos and scolding them for fearing a defeated enemy, he placed garrisons at the gates. The Senate was called into session and a general suspension of business was passed. The Consul then set out to defend the borders, leaving former consul Quintus Servilius in charge of the City. However, he found no enemy in the countryside.

Consul Fabius, on the other hand, achieved a brilliant success attacking the Aequians where he knew they would be. Knowing the enemy's likely route, he found them weighed down with plundered Roman loot and moving slowly. This made their raid fatal for them. Few of the Aequians escaped the ambush and all the stolen goods were recovered.

The return of Consul Quinctius to the City ended the state of emergency and the suspension of business, which had lasted only four days. A census was then taken, and the purification ceremony \[lustrum\] was performed by Consul Quinctius. The number of citizens counted was said to be one-hundred and four thousand, seven hundred and fourteen people, not including orphaned boys and girls.

Nothing notable happened afterward among the Aequians; they retreated into their towns, allowing their property to be burned and plundered. Consul Fabius, after marching through their territory multiple times with his hostile army to plunder, returned to Rome with high praise and a massive amount of booty.