**3.4** Aulus Postumius Albus and Spurius Furius Fusus next became consuls. Some historians have written Furios and Fusios. I mention this to avoid confusion, as the change is only in the names, not the individuals.

From the beginning, it was clear that one of the consuls would start a war with the Aequians. The Aequians knew this, and they sought help from the Volscians of Ecetra. The Volscians eagerly agreed, driven by their deep-seated hate for the Romans, and the two armies began preparing for war with utmost energy. The Hernician allies found out about this new alliance and warned the Romans that Ecetra had joined a revolt with the Aequians.

The Romans suspected that the colonists from the recently founded colony of Antium were disloyal. When the town was captured, many of its original inhabitants fled to the Aequians. These same Antium refugees turned out to be the bravest soldiers in the war against the Romans. After the Aequians were driven back into the walls of their towns, the Antium refugees secretly returned to Antium. Once they arrived, refugees found the colonists already alienated, and they succeeded in completely turning them against Rome.

When the Senate heard about this defection, the consuls were ordered to investigate. They summoned the colony's leaders to Rome and, while the leaders did answer the Senate's questions, they did so in such a way that made them seem even more suspicious than when they arrived. At that point, war seemed inevitable.

Consul Furius marched against the Aequians and found them raiding the Hernicians' land. He underestimated their numbers and foolishly engaged them in battle, only to be forced to retreat back to the Roman camp. The danger didn't end there, as his camp was attacked relentlessly both during the night and on the following day, making it impossible to send a messenger to Rome.

The Hernicians reported the news of the defeat and the blockade to the Senate. It caused such alarm that the Senate passed a decree \[senatus consultum ultimum\], which was only used in the gravest crises (and then only as a last resort), instructing Consul Postumius to see to it that the Republic suffered no harm. It was decided that Consul Postumius should stay in Rome to enlist all who could bear arms, while former consul Titus Quinctius would be sent as proconsul, representing the current consul and serving as general, to relieve the besieged camp with an army to provide relief. To carry it out, Quinctius ordered the Latins, Hernicians, and the colony of Antium, to provide subitarios milites, or what was called "emergency-drafted reinforcements."