**7.38** The outcome of this conflict forced the Faliscans, who were in a truce, to request an alliance treaty from the Senate. It also diverted the Latins, who had their armies ready, from a war with Rome to a war with Paelignians. The renown of such a victory didn't stay within Italy's borders; the Carthaginians also sent ambassadors to Rome to congratulate them, presenting a twenty-five pound golden crown for the Temple of Jupiter on the Capitoline Hill.

Both consuls triumphed over the Samnites, with Decius following behind them, receiving praise and gifts. Thanks to the soldiers' rough humor, the military tribune's name was celebrated as much as the consuls' names.

The Senate then heard the ambassadors of Campania and Suessula, granting their request for a garrison during the wintertime to fend off Samnite invasions. Capua, known for its abundance of pleasures, and not particularly supportive of military discipline, turned the Roman soldiers' minds away from their homeland. In their winter quarters they began to hatch plans to seize Capua from the Campanians using the same treachery the Campanians used to take it from its original inhabitants. Why shouldn't the same fate happen to the Campanians as had happened to their predecessors? Why should the Campanians, who couldn't defend themselves or their possessions, have the most fertile land in Italy and a city worthy of that land, rather than the victorious army who had expelled the Samnites from there with their blood and sweat? Was it fair that the men who surrendered to them should fully enjoy that fertile and delightful country? Instead, Roman soldiers, tired from military service, had to struggle in a pestilential and dry soil around their city or, within the city, had to suffer the creeping plague of debt that grew worse day by day.

These plans, though still confined to secret conspiracies and not widely known, were discovered by the new consul, Gaius Marcius Rutilus, who had been assigned the province of Campania by lot, leaving his colleague Quintus Servilius Ahala, in the City. Consul Marcius, having learned everything through the plebeian tribunes as it was happening. Since he was experienced, having been a consul four times and a dictator and a censor, he decided the best course of action was to frustrate the soldiers' plans by postponing their hope of carrying out their scheme whenever they wished. He spread the rumor that the troops would again winter in the same towns during the same time next year. Soldiers had been spread throughout the cities of Campania, and their scheming had spread from Capua to the entire army. The rumor relaxed their eagerness to carry out their plans, calming the sedition for the time being.