**7.41** With all shouting approval, Titus Quinctius stepped forward before the standards and announced that the soldiers would obey the Dictator. He asked with Corvus to support the cause of his unfortunate fellow citizens, and, once he had taken up their cause, to uphold it with the same dedication he had always shown in public affairs of the Republic.

As for himself, he said that he didn't seek any special protections but would place his trust solely in his innocence. Protections should be made for the soldiers, however, just as the Senate had previously done for the plebeians and again for the legions, so that there would be no punishment for their secession.

The Dictator praised Quinctius and encouraged everyone to remain hopeful. He quickly returned to the city on horseback and, with the Senate's approval, proposed to the people in the Peteline Grove that no soldier should suffer because of the secession. He also begged, with the good will of the Quirites, that no one should mock or criticize anyone for their part in the event.

A sacred military law was then passed stating that a soldier's name couldn't be removed from the roll without his consent. Added to the law was a provision that no one who had been a military tribune could later serve as a centurion. It was a demand made by the conspirators because of Publius Salonius, who had alternated between the roles of military tribune and first centurion, a position now known as primus pilus. The soldiers were angry with him because he had consistently opposed their new ideas and, to avoid being part of the mutiny, had fled Lautulae.

The Senate initially refused this demand out of respect for Salonius, but Salonius himself persuaded them to agree, arguing that the unity of the state was more important than his own personal career. An equally excessive demand was made for a reduction in the cavalry's pay, which was then three times the standard rate, because they had opposed the conspiracy.