**7.42** In addition to these, some authors mention that Lucius Genucius, a plebeian tribune, brought a law before the plebeians that lending money with interest should be prohibited. Other laws were also established, stating that no one should hold the same position within a decade, or hold two positions in the same year. It was also proposed that both consuls could be plebeians. If all these concessions were granted to the people, it's clear to me that the rebellion had significant power.

In other historical records, it's noted that Valerius wasn't appointed as dictator, but that the whole matter was carried out by the consuls. It's also recorded that the group of conspirators didn't resort to arms before coming to Rome, but armed themselves after they arrived in Rome. Also, some say that the attack that was made by night wasn't on the house of Titus Quinctius, but on the house of Gaius Manlius, whom they captured to be their leader. From there, they went to the fourth stone and settled in a fortified place. The idea of reconciliation didn't originate from the generals, but unexpectedly, when the armies were fully armed and marched into battle formation, a mutual greeting occurred. The soldiers began to mingle, shaking hands and hugging each other with tears in their eyes. Seeing the soldiers' reluctance to fight, the consuls were forced to refer the matter of reconciliation to the Senate to restore peace. Thus, none of the ancient authorities agree totally, but they do agree that there was a sedition, and it was resolved.

The news of this sedition, along with the intense war with the Samnites, caused some states to break away from the Roman alliance. Not only had the Latins been unfaithful to the treaty for a long time, but the Privernates also suddenly invaded and plundered the neighboring Roman colonies of Norba and Setia.