**3.44** The second terrible act occurred in the City, born out of brutal lust, leading to consequences as tragic as the event that expelled the Tarquins from the City, ending their kingship, due to the rape and violent death of Lucretia. Similarly, the decemvirs lost their power in the same way and for the same reasons as Rome's kings did.

Appius Claudius was seized with the lust to rape a young woman of plebeian status named Verginia. The girl's father, Lucius Verginius, was a respected centurion at Algidum, known for his exemplary conduct both at home and in the military. His wife had been educated in the same way and his children were being educated as well. He had promised Verginia in marriage to Lucius Icilius, a tribune known for his keen intelligence and proven bravery in defending the plebeian cause.

Consumed by desire for the outstandingly beautiful young adult virgin, Appius Claudius tried to win her over with money and promise of rewards. When he realized that her modesty prevented him from possessing her, he changed his mind to cruel and arrogant violence. He gave the task to his client, Marcus Claudius, to claim the girl as his slave and to resist anyone who might demand her temporary freedom. Appius took this opportunity to take her since her father was away.

When the girl came to the Forum, where schools for reading and writing were held in the booths, the agent of the decemvir's lust laid hands on her and called her the daughter of his slave and a slave herself. He ordered her to follow him, threatening to drag her by force her if she resisted. The frightened girl was paralyzed by shock. At the cries of her nurse pleading for help from the Quirites, a crowd gathered. The respected names of her father, Verginius, and her betrothed, Icilius, both popular among the people, were on everyone's lips. Friends came to her aid, won over by their respect for them, while the indignation of the people and their sympathy for the maiden helped her.

She was now safe from violence, when Marcus Claudius told the crowd that there was no need for an agitated crowd; he was merely acting within the law, not using force. He summoned the girl to court. Those who were with her advised her to follow him, and they arrived at the court of Appius Claudius. Marcus Claudius repeated the false story to Appius Claudius, now the judge as well as the mastermind of the plot. He claimed that the girl had been born in his house and had been abducted and secretly moved to Verginius' house and had been passed off as the latter's daughter. He claimed that he had solid evidence and would prove it, even if Verginius himself were judge, who would be most affected by the loss. Marcus Claudius argued that it was only fair that the girl should stay with her master in the meantime.

The advocates for Verginia argued that Verginius was away on state business, that he would be back in two days if they sent word to him, and that it was unfair for him to risk losing his children while he was away. The advocates asked that the whole matter be postponed until the father's arrival, that the girl be allowed provisional freedom according to the law passed by Appius Claudius himself, and that he should not allow an adult virgin to risk her reputation before her freedom was even judged.