**3.45** Appius Claudius began his decree by noting that the law, which Verginia's friends were using as the basis of their request, clearly demonstrated his support for Verginia's freedom. However, he stated that this freedom would only be safeguarded if it didn't change depending on the situation or the people involved. The law, he argued, was valid only for those who were claimed to be free, as anyone could legally represent them. But Verginia was either under her father's control or a slave under the control of her master. She wasn't free and no action to recover her freedom was necessary.

Appius decided that Verginia's father should be summoned. In the meantime, Marcus Claudius, the claimant, wouldn't lose his rights and could take the girl with him, promising to bring her back when her father arrived. This decision was met with murmurs of disapproval, but no one dared to openly object.

Verginia's uncle, Publius Numitorius, and her betrothed, Lucius Icilius, arrived. The crowd made way for them, thinking that Appius Claudius could be best opposed by Icilius. When Icilius tried to speak, a lictor announced that the matter had been decided and pushed the shouting Icilius aside. Normally calm by nature, but angered by the injustice, Icilius declared, "You'll have to remove me with the point of your sword, Appius, if you expect me to remain silent about what you want kept secret. I'm going to marry this girl, and I'm determined to have a chaste wife. Summon all the lictors of all your colleagues and give orders for the axes and rods to be ready. The betrothed of Icilius shall not remain outside her father's house. Even if you have deprived us of the two citadels of freedom, the aid of our tribunes and the right of appeal to the Roman plebeians, you have no right to our wives and children as the victims of your lust."

"Vent your cruelty upon our backs and necks but let female chastity at least be safe! If any violence happens to this girl, I will invoke the aid of the Quirites here for the woman betrothed to me. Lucius Verginius will get aid similarly for his only daughter! We shall all ask for the aid of gods and men, and you'll never carry out this judgment except by our murder. Reflect, Appius. Where are you going with this? When Verginius comes, he must decide what action to take. If he submits to this man's claim, then he must look for another husband for her. As for me, in defense of the freedom of my bride, I'll sooner die than prove disloyal."