**3.47** At dawn in the City, the citizens gathered in the Forum, waiting in anticipation. Lucius Verginius, dressed in mourning clothes, led his daughter, dressed in tattered clothing, into the Forum. They were accompanied by a group of matrons and a large number of supporters.

Lucius Verginius began to move among the people and to detain individuals, asking for their help. He didn't just request their assistance as a favor, but claimed it as his right, reminding them that he fought daily in battle to protect their children and spouses, and that no other man had performed more courageous acts in war than he. What good was it, he asked, if, though the City remained safe, your children should suffer the same fate that would be feared only if the City had been captured? He circulated around the people incessantly, almost speaking in a public address, but he spoke to them one by one. Lucius Icilius used similar arguments, but the women's silent weeping was more powerful than any words.

Despite all this, Appius Claudius, driven more by madness of lust than love, took his place on the judge's stand. Marcus Claudius, the man working for Appius and falsely claiming the girl, began to complain that he hadn't received justice the day before due to partiality.

Before he could complete his request or Verginius could be given a chance to respond, Appius interrupted. The introduction to what was said next, his judgement, may have been recorded accurately by ancient authors, but because I find no likely introduction for such a disgraceful matter, it seems best to simply state the fact that no one disputes: Appius Claudius declared the girl a slave.

At first, everyone was shocked by this outrageous act, and a silence fell over the crowd. When Marcus Claudius pushed through the crowd and tried to take the girl, the women surrounding her began to cry out in sorrow. Verginius, pointing threateningly at Appius, declared, "It's to Icilius and not to you, Appius, that I've betrothed my daughter; I've brought her up for marriage, not for rape. Are you determined to satisfy your brutal lust and rush promiscuously into intercourse just like cattle and wild beasts? Whether these people will put up with this, I don't know, but I hope that those who possess weapons will refuse to do so."

When Marcus Claudius was pushed back by the crowd of matrons and supporters surrounding her, the herald called for silence.