**3.48** Appius Claudius, his mind still consumed by lust, claimed that he had hard evidence of a planned rebellion. This evidence came not only from these harsh words of Lucius Icilius and the actions of Lucius Verginius, which were witnessed by all of Rome, but also from other, reliable sources. He learned that secret meetings were held throughout the night to incite a rebellion. In fact, he brought armed soldiers with him, not to harm peaceful citizens, but to punish those who threatened the peace of the state."

"Therefore, it's better to be quiet," he said. "Lictor, remove the crowd and clear the way for the master to seize the slave!" After he finished his rage-filled words, the crowd itself moved aside of its own accord, and the girl stood abandoned, a prey to injustice.

Then Verginius, seeing no help anywhere, said, "I beg you, Appius, first forgive my fatherly grief if I've spoken to you harshly; and then allow me to question the nurse in front of the virgin to understand what this is all about, so that if I've been falsely called her father, I may leave here with a clear conscience."

After getting permission, he took Verginia and the nurse aside to the booths near the Temple of Cloacina, now known as the New Booths. There, he grabbed a knife from a butcher and plunged the knife into Verginia's breast saying, "This is the only way I can ensure your freedom." Then, looking back at the tribunal, he cursed Appius Claudius saying, "By this blood, Appius, I devote your head to the gods of vengeance."

Appius, shocked by the horrific act, immediately ordered Verginius to be arrested. But Verginius, armed with the knife, made a path through the crowd protected by a large group of sympathizers until he reached the gate and escaped. Icilius and Numitorius picked up Verginia's lifeless body and showed it to the people, lamenting Appius' wicked crime, the girl's tragic beauty, and the desperate act of her father.

Everyone was affected. The matrons in the crowd cried out, asking if this was the price of raising children and the reward for maintaining their chastity. Their grief was intense, and their words were deeply moving. The voices of the men, led by Icilius, focused their anger on the abolition of the tribune power, the loss of their right to appeal, and their indignation at the disrespect shown to the state.