**3.49** The crowd was stirred up, partly by the horrific nature of the act and partly by the opportunity of regaining their freedom. Appius then commanded Lucius Icilius to be brought before him, and when he refused to come, ordered him to be arrested.

Eventually, when the lictors couldn't get to him, Appius himself, accompanied by a group of young patricians, entered the crowd and ordered the lictors to drag Icilius to prison in chains. By now, not only the crowd, but also Lucius Valerius and Marcus Horatius, the leaders of the crowd, stood by Icilius. They pushed back the lictors of the decemvirs, declaring that if Appius was acting legally, Lucius Icilius was a private citizen, and they had a right to defend him. If Appius wanted to use force, they would be a good match for him. This led to a violent struggle. The lictors of the decemvir attacked Valerius and Horatius, but the crowd smashed the lictors' fasces.

Appius Claudius climbed the tribunal steps to address the people, followed by Horatius and Valerius. The assembly listened to Horatius and Valerius but drowned out the voice of Appius Claudius with their shouts when he tried to speak. And now, as if already exercising lawful authority, Valerius then ordered the lictors to leave Lucius Icilius and cease guarding Appius Claudius, as he was merely a private citizen. Appius Claudius, his spirit broken and now fearing for his life, ran into a house near the Forum, his head covered with his toga, where he hid from his opponents.

Spurius Oppius, trying to help Appius, as he was his colleague, burst into the Forum from the other side. He saw the authority of the decemvirs being overpowered by the force of the people. Distracted by conflicting advice coming from many sides, he hesitated. Finally, he ordered the Senate to be convened. This calmed the plebeians, as they knew the actions of the decemvirs were disliked by most of the senators, and the plebeians hoped that the Senate would end the power of the decemvirs.

The Senate decided that the plebeians shouldn't be provoked and, even more urgently, that precautions should be taken not to cause any disturbance in the army when Verginius returned to the camp.
