**3.51** Having dismissed the ambassadors, Lucius Verginius spoke to the soldiers. He reminded them that just minutes earlier they had struggled with a relatively simple issue because they lacked leadership. Their solution, while not bad, was more the result of chance than a well-thought-out plan.

Verginius suggested that the soldiers elect ten people to lead them, and that these leaders should be given military authority under the title of "military tribunes". When the soldiers offered him the honor of being one of the military tribunes, Verginius declined. "Save your high opinion of me for a better time, for your sake and mine. I can't accept any honor until my daughter is avenged. In the current chaotic situation, it wouldn't be helpful for you to have leaders who are targets of political hatred. If I can be useful to you, I will serve just as well as a private citizen." The soldiers then elected ten military tribunes.

Meanwhile, the Roman army sent to fight the Sabines was also active. There, Lucius Icilius and Publius Numitorius led a rebellion against those decemvirs. The soldiers, still angry about the murder of Lucius Siccius, were further enraged by the recent news of a brutal attack on a young virgin so shamefully pursued for lust.

When Icilius heard that the troops with Verginius on Mount Aventine had elected their own ten military tribunes, he worried that the plebeians might follow their example and elect the same people as plebeian tribunes. Skilled in popular politics and aspiring to that very office himself, he made sure that his own soldiers elected ten military tribunes with equal authority before going to Rome.

The soldiers then entered the City through the Colline Gate, under standards in a military formation, and marched through the heart of the City to the Aventine Hill. There, they joined the other army and asked the twenty military tribunes to choose two of them to be the main commanders. They chose Marcus Oppius and Sextus Manilius.

The Senate, fearing for the safety of Rome, met every day but spent more time arguing than making decisions. The decemvirs were charged with the murder of Siccius, the lust of Appius Claudius, and the disgrace of the military failures.

The patricians decided that the ambassadors, Lucius Valerius and Marcus Horatius, should go to the Aventine Hill, but Valerius and Horatius refused to go unless the decemvirs laid down the insignia of their office, which had officially ended the previous year. The decemvirs complained that they were being unfairly treated and insisted that they wouldn't resign until the laws for which they had been appointed were passed.