**3.52** Marcus Duillius, a former plebeian tribune, told the plebeians that their constant disputes were preventing any work from being done in the Senate. Duillius declared that the Senate wouldn't take their concerns seriously until they saw Rome deserted. He suggested the plebeians move from the Aventine Hill, inside Rome, to the Sacred Mount outside the City. Duillius thought that the Sacred Mount would remind them of the plebeians' past determination and that the Senate would realize that harmony couldn't be restored without reinstating the tribune's power.

Following this advice, the armies set off along the Nomentan Way, then known as the Ficulan Road, and set up camp on the Sacred Mount. They committed no acts of violence and showed restraint, following the example of their ancestors. The plebeians followed the army, with only those too old to travel staying behind. Their wives and children accompanied them, miserably asking who could protect them in a city where neither chastity nor freedom was respected.

When everything in Rome had become desolate and unfamiliar due to the unusual solitude, there was no one in the Forum except for a few old men. The Forum had certainly appeared deserted when the senators were summoned to the Senate.

There were many others besides Horatius and Valerius who protested. "What are you waiting for, senators?" they cried. "If the decemvirs don't end their stubbornness, will you let everything collapse and burn down? What power do you hold, decemvirs, if you only rule over empty buildings? Are you not embarrassed that there are more of your lictors than citizens in togas in the Forum? What will you do if an enemy approaches the City? What if the plebeians return armed? Do you plan to end your rule with the fall of the City?"

"You can either not have plebeians or have plebeians and accept their tribunes. You can't have both. We would rather do without our patrician magistrates than they without their plebeian magistrates. The plebeians took this power from our ancestors when it was offered, new and untested; the plebeians won't tolerate losing it now that they have experienced its benefits, especially since we haven't used our power moderately, so the plebeians need the help of the tribunes."

When these arguments were made from all sides, the decemvirs, overwhelmed by the unanimous opinion, agreed to step down and submit to the authority of the Senate. The decemvirs only asked for one thing, and it was also a warning: they wanted protection from the anger of the plebeians. If the patricians allowed them to shed the blood of the decemvirs, it set precedent that the same could be done to the patricians.
