**3.21** The Senate was gathering on the Capitoline Hill as tribunes arrived with the agitated plebeians. The crowd, screaming loudly, sought protection of the consuls and then the senators. However, they couldn't persuade the Consul to change his mind until the tribunes agreed to follow the authority of the Senate. Cincinnatus then presented the tribunes' and the plebeians' demands to the Senate. After consulting, the Senate passed resolutions that the tribunes shouldn't propose the Terentillian Law that year, and the consuls shouldn't lead the army out of the City.

The Senate also decided that to keep the same magistrates and continue reappointing the same tribunes would be detrimental to the Republic. The consuls obeyed the Senate's authority; however, the same tribunes were elected again despite the consuls' objections. The patricians, not wanting to give in to the plebeians, re-elected Lucius Quinctius Cincinnatus as Consul. This was the most heated issue of the year.

"Should I be surprised," Cincinnatus said, "that your authority carries little weight, senators? You, yourselves, are undermining it. Since the plebeians have ignored your Senate decree regarding successive terms, you also want to ignore it because you don't want to appear weaker than the plebeians. It's as if having more power in the state means being more inconsistent and more unrestrained! It's certainly more fickle and senseless to disregard one's own decrees and resolutions than those of others."

"Follow the thoughtless crowd, senators, and you, who should be setting an example, are breaking the rules because of others' actions, rather than having others follow your good example. I won't follow the tribunes or allow myself to be re-elected consul against a Senate decree. I advise you, Consul Gaius Claudius, to control the Roman plebeians' recklessness. Understand that I won't consider your actions as an obstacle to my honor. Instead, the glory from me declining the honor is increased and the hatred that people would feel if we allowed this to continue is decreased."

They then jointly issued an edict forbidding anyone to elect Lucius Quinctius Cincinnatus as Consul. If anyone did, they wouldn't accept that vote.