**3.22** Quintus Fabius Vibulanus was elected consul for the third time, along with Lucius Cornelius Maluginensis.

That year, the census was conducted. However, the lustrum purification sacrifice wasn't performed because of scruples about how the Capitoline Hill had been seized and how the former consul had been slain.

The consulship of Quintus Fabius and Lucius Cornelius was a difficult one from the very beginning of the year. Conflicts erupted as the tribunes began to instigate the plebeians. Latins and Hernician allies reported that the Volscians and Aequians were preparing for a large-scale war. Volscian troops were already in Antium. There was also a fear that the colony itself might rebel. The tribunes reluctantly agreed to prioritize the war.

The consuls divided the responsibilities. Consul Fabius was tasked with leading the legions to Antium, while Consul Cornelius was to defend the City with a garrison so that no part of the enemy, as was the Aequi custom, should plunder the countryside. The Hernician and Latin allies were ordered to provide soldiers, as per their treaty. The army was composed of two-thirds allies and one-third Roman citizens.

When the allies arrived on the appointed day, Consul Fabius set up his camp outside the Capena Gate. After inspecting and purifying the army, he marched toward Antium and encamped at a short distance from the city and the Volscians' encampment. As the Aequians hadn't yet arrived, the Volscians were unwilling to engage in battle. Instead, the Volscians prepared to defend themselves within their rampart. The next day, Consul Fabius separated out the Romans, Hernicians, and Latins into three separate groups, one from each nation, surrounding the enemy's rampart. He would be in the middle with the Roman legions. The Consul instructed them to observe his signals carefully so that each division could both start the battle and retreat together if he gave the signal for withdrawal. He then positioned cavalry behind each respective division.

Using this formation, they attacked the camp from three directions, pressing from all sides and immediately dislodged the Volscians away from their rampart, as they were unable to protect themselves from all sides simultaneously. Fabius got inside the Volscian lines and drove the panic-stricken mob, now moving in a single direction, out of their camp. The cavalry had been mere spectators of the fight until then, as the horses couldn't enter the fortifications. With the soldiers fleeing in disarray onto the open plain, the cavalry now intercepted the Volscians and shared in the victory by cutting down the terrified troops. The slaughter of the fleeing troops was great, both in the camp and outside the lines, but the spoils of war were even greater because the enemy could barely carry their weapons with them as they ran.

The entire Volscian army would have been destroyed if the forest hadn't provided them cover during their flight.