**3.27** The following day, Dictator Cincinnatus arrived in the Forum before dawn. He appointed Lucius Tarquitius as his Master of the Horse. Tarquitius was a man from a noble family, but one who had been a foot-soldier because of poverty. Despite his limited resources, Tarquitius was widely regarded as the most skilled military strategist among Rome's young men.

The Dictator, accompanied by his Master of the Horse, proceeded to the assembly and declared a justitium, a halt to all civil activities. He ordered all shops in the City to close and prohibited anyone from transacting any private business whatsoever. He then instructed all men of military age to gather in the Campus Martius before sunset, armed and carrying cooked rations for five days plus twelve stakes.

He also ordered those too old for military service to prepare food for the army while the soldiers prepared their weapons and gathered the stakes. The young men scattered in various directions to find stakes, taking them from the nearest places they could find. No one was hindered and everyone eagerly complied with the Dictator's orders promptly.

Then, having assembled the legions, the Dictator himself led them while the Master of the Horse led the cavalry. They marched in well-ordered formation, ready for immediate battle if needed. In both groups the commanders gave encouragement suitable to the emergency such as: Pick up the pace! It's necessary to hurry to reach the enemy by night! The consul and the Roman army were under siege and they've been shut in now for three days! Who knows what each day or night would bring! The moments of the greatest events often turns in a single instant! To show their commitment, the soldiers shouted out to each other, "Standard-bearer, move faster!" "Follow, soldiers!"

Cincinnatus' army arrived at Algidum in the middle of the night and, as soon as the Dictator realized they were within striking distance of the enemy, they halted and set up camp.