**5.20** Camillus saw that victory was within his grasp. The most opulent city was about to be captured, with spoils greater than any previous conflict. He wanted to avoid angering the soldiers with a stingy division of the loot on the one hand or upsetting the patricians with an overly generous distribution to them on the other, so he composed a letter to the Senate. Thanks to the kindness of the immortal gods, his own strategies, and the soldiers' determination, he wrote, Veii would soon be under Roman control. What did the Senate think should be done with the spoils of war?

Two differing opinions emerged from the Senate. The first was from the elder Publius Licinius who was questioned by his son. He suggested that a public announcement be made, inviting anyone who wished to share in the loot should come to the camp at Veii.

The second opinion was from Appius Claudius who argued against Licinius' new proposal of the distribution as extravagant, unfair and ill-considered. If it was once considered wrong for money taken from the enemy to go to the treasury, which had been drained by wars, he suggested it should then be used to pay the soldiers. This way, it would reduce the amount of tax demanded from the plebeians. The benefits of this distribution would be felt equally by all households, he argued, rather than the greedy hands of idle city-dwellers taking the rewards that should rightfully go to the brave warriors. It often happens, he added, that the laziest are the ones to plunder the most, while those who take the greatest share of the hardship and danger are left with the least.

Licinius countered that using the money in this way would only lead to jealousy and conflict. It could lead to accusations among the plebeians, resulting in sedition and new laws. Instead, he argued, it was better to win the favor of the plebeians by sharing the spoils of war. His idea would provide relief to those burdened by years of taxation and allow them to enjoy the benefits of a war they had endured for so long. What each person took from the enemy and carried home with his own hands would be much more satisfying than receiving multiple shares determined by someone else.

He noted that the Dictator, himself, wanted to avoid the blame and criticism that could come from this decision, so he was passing the responsibility onto the Senate to decide for him. His idea would allow the Senate to pass the decision onto the plebeians, themselves, allowing each person to keep whatever the fortunes of war had provided to each.

Licinius' idea seemed safer and would likely make the Senate more popular. Accordingly, a proclamation was issued inviting those who wished to take part in sharing the spoils of Veii should join the Dictator at the camp.