**5.21** A large crowd went out to Veii and filled the camp. Camillus, after taking the auspices and ordering the soldiers to arm themselves, said, "Under your leadership, Pythian Apollo, and inspired by your divinity, I proceed forward to destroy the city of Veii, and I promise you a tenth part of the spoils. I also beg you, Juno Regina, who now resides in Veii, to follow us as victors to our City, soon to be yours, where a temple worthy of your majesty will welcome you." After these prayers, he ordered an attack on the city from all sides with an overwhelming number of men, such that the inhabitants of Veii wouldn't sense the danger approaching from the Roman's tunnel.

The Veientes spent their final days in total ignorance that their own soothsayers, as well as foreign oracles, had already doomed them, and that their gods had been invited to share in the Romans' plunder. They didn't know that some Veientes had been summoned by vows to abandon their city and were already looking to the enemy's new temples and new homes. They didn't know they were living through their last day, and feared nothing, unaware that the walls of their citadel was already full of enemies having been breached by a tunnel.

The Veientes rushed to the walls in arms, in awe at what was happening. They were astonished to see the Romans, who had been quiet for days, with no one moving from his post, were now surging forward like madmen in a frenzy, rushing to their walls.

At this point, some sources insert a story: a legend tells that when the king of the Veii was offering a sacrifice, the Romans heard the voice of a haruspex from inside the tunnel, declaring that the victory would go to whomever cut up the entrails of the sacrifice. This spurred the Romans to break open the mine, steal the entrails, and bring them to the Dictator. However, in such ancient stories, it's enough to accept those that seem plausible. This particular tale, more suited to a stage production than to historical accuracy, isn't worth affirming or refuting.

At this time, the tunnel, filled with a select group of men, suddenly erupted with armed Roman troops, spilling into the Temple of Juno Regina inside the citadel of Veii. Some attacked the Veientes from behind on the walls; some tore down the bars on the gates; some set fire to the houses when women and slaves threw stones and tiles from the roofs. The clamor filled the city with various voices of terror and fear, mixed with the screams and cries of weeping women and children.

In a moment the Veiian soldiers were quickly thrown off the walls on all sides, and the gates were opened. While some Roman soldiers rushed in, in columns, others scaled the deserted walls, and the city was filled with enemies. Fighting broke out everywhere in all directions. After much bloodshed, the intensity of the fight lessened, and Camillus ordered the heralds to announce that the unarmed should be spared. This ended the bloodshed. The disarmed Veiian people began to surrender, and the soldiers, with the Dictator's permission, began to search for plunder.

When the plunder was gathered before him, much bigger than he had hoped or expected, and of greater value that anything he had, the Dictator is said to have raised his hand to heaven and prayed, asking that if his good fortune and that of the Roman people seemed too excessive to gods or men, that they might be allowed to appease this envy with as little harm as possible to himself and the Roman people. It's recorded that as Camillus was turning around in the middle of this reverent prayer, he slipped and fell to the floor. Later, those who interpreted events by their outcomes believe that this omen referred to the condemnation of Camillus himself, and to the disaster of the capture of the City of Rome, which occurred a few years later.

And the rest of that day was spent slaughtering the enemy and plundering a very opulent, wealthy city.