**5.22** The next day, Camillus auctioned off the Veiian freeborn citizens as slaves. This was the only money brought into the public treasury, but it caused resentment among the plebeians. The spoils they brought home themselves, they gave credit not to Camillus who, not wanting to look greedy, had referred the matter to the Senate. Instead, they credited the Licinian family because the son had presented the matter to the Senate, and the father had proposed a resolution that was well-received by the plebeians.

After all the wealth had been stripped from Veii, they began to carry off the offerings to their gods as well as the gods, themselves. However, they did this more like worshippers than plunderers. Young soldiers specifically chosen from the whole army, their bodies washed and purified, dressed in white garments and were given the task of transporting Juno Regina to Rome. They entered her temple with deep reverence. Raising their hands hesitantly, they touched the statue with religious awe, which, according to Etruscan custom, only a priest from a certain family was allowed to touch it.

Then, someone, either inspired by a divine force or youthful jest, asked, "Juno, do you want to go to Rome?" The others cried out, shouting that the goddess had nodded in agreement. From this story was added that her voice was heard saying that she was willing. It's accepted among sources that she was lifted from her place by a slight effort of supports and was light and easy to move, as if she were following them. Juno Regina was safely brought intact to the Aventine Hill, her eternal home, where the vows of the Roman dictator had called her, and where the same Camillus who had vowed it later dedicated a temple to her.

This was the fall of Veii, the most affluent city of the Etruscan nation. Even in its downfall, it showed its greatness. It was under siege for ten continuous summers and winters, and it inflicted significantly more damage than it suffered. Finally, driven by fate, it was conquered not by force, but by clever strategy and siege engines.