**10.11** The Etruscans were assigned to Consul Titus Manlius Torquatus.

He had barely entered enemy territory when he was thrown from his horse and nearly died on the spot. Torquatus was drilling with the cavalry and turned his horse sharply at a rapid gallop. He died three days later.

The Etruscans saw this as an omen of their future success in the war, believing that the gods had started the fight on their behalf, and it renewed their courage. In Rome, the news of Manlius' death caused great sorrow due to the loss of a great man, but also the unfortunate timing.

The Senate wanted to order the election of a dictator to replace the consul. With the advice of the leading men, though, they were dissuaded from doing so. Instead, all the centuries unanimously declared Marcus Valerius Corvus as consul for the sixth time. This was the very same man which the Senate had been about to appoint as dictator.

Immediately, the Consul was ordered to march into Etruscan territory to join the legions. His arrival deflated the Etruscans so much that they didn't dare leave their trenches; their fear was similar to as if they were under siege. Despite the new consul's efforts to draw them out by destroying their fields and burning the roofs of their homes, even burning isolated farms and a number of villages, and even with the smoke from fires burning everywhere, they refused to engage in battle.

While the war progressed slower than expected, news came of another conflict far more alarming due to the mutual devastation that occurred in the past. The Picentes, new allies of Rome, reported that the Samnites were preparing for war and had tried to recruit them to join their rebellion. The Senate thanked the Picentes for their loyalty and shifted their focus from the Etruscans to the impending Samnite conflict.

At the same time, the City was also struggling with a grain shortage. Severe famine would have been imminent had Fabius Maximus, the curule aedile that year, not managed the food supplies with the same diligence that he had done when he had saved Rome many times in war. He ensured that the grain was quickly imported and fairly distributed. 

There was an interregnum this year, but the reason wasn't mentioned. Appius Claudius was the interrex first and then Publius Sulpicius served as interrex. Sulpicius held an election for consuls and chose Lucius Cornelius Scipio Barbatus and Gnaeus Fulvius Maximus Centumalus. 

At the start of this year, ambassadors from Lucania came to the new consuls to complain that the Samnites had invaded their land with a hostile army, ravaged their land, and were now forcing them into war because they refused to form an alliance with them. They acknowledged that they had previously made mistakes against Rome but were now resolute: they would rather endure anything than ever again break faith with the Romans. They pleaded with the Senate to accept them under Roman protection and to defend them from Samnite aggression. Despite the fact that their past actions had forced them to make an alliance with Samnites, loyalty to Rome was now a matter of necessity and they were willing to give hostages to prove their loyalty to Rome.