**10.6** During the consulship of Marcus Valerius Corvus for the fifth time, and Quintus Appuleius Pansa, things abroad were fairly peaceful.

The Etruscans were kept quiet due to their failures in war and by the truce. The Samnites, who had suffered many years of defeats, were content with their new treaty. In Rome, the plebeians were calmed by the relocation of a large number of them to colonies.

However, not everything was peaceful. A conflict arose between the leading figures in the City, the patricians on one side and the plebeians on the other. It was instigated by two plebeian tribunes, Quintus Ogulnius and Gnaeus Ogulnius. The two tribunes sought every opportunity to criticize the patricians in front of the plebeians.

After many attempts failed, they did something that would not only incite the lower classes of the plebeians, but would also inflame the leaders of the plebeians, the same ones who had been consuls and had been given triumphs. The only thing missing from their honors were the priesthood offices, which weren't yet open to them. The two men proposed a law \[Lex Ogulnia\] that since there were now four augurs and four pontiffs, the number of priests should be increased by adding four additional pontiffs and five augurs, and they should all be co-opted from the plebeians.

Since it is a known principle that the number of augurs must be odd, the fact that the augurs were reduced to four must be that two of them had died. The odd number is so that the three ancient tribes, Ramnes, Titienses, and Luceres, each have their own augur, or, if more are needed, the priests should be increased in equal numbers. This was the case when five were added to the existing four, making nine in total, with three assigned to each tribe.

However, because the roles would be co-opted from plebeians, the patricians resented this as bitterly as they had when the consulship was opened to the plebeians. They pretended that this was more a matter for the gods, rather than for themselves; the gods would see to it that their own sacred rites would not be contaminated. They only wished that no harm would come to the state.

In the end, they put up less resistance, as they were now used to losing such disputes. They saw their opponents were not seeking, as they once scarcely hoped for in the past, to obtain higher offices, since they already possessed all the advantages they had fought for, including multiple consulships, censorships, and triumphs.