**10.7** There was a large debate over supporting or opposing the law, it is said, in which Appius Claudius and Publius Decius Mus were the principal speakers. They both argued about the rights of patricians and plebeians, similar to the arguments used in the past for and against the Licinian Law which allowed plebeians to become consuls.

Decius is said to have recalled a vivid picture of his own father, that many in the assembly had seen, dressed in the Gabine cincture, standing on a spear, in the pose he had taken when he devoted or sacrificed himself for the Roman people and the legions. Publius Decius the consul was considered by the immortal gods to be a pure and pious consul, and his offering was just as if his colleague, Titus Manlius, had been the one sacrificed.

And yet, was this same Publius Decius, who had performed the sacred public rites of the Roman people, now to be deemed unfit by law to conduct them properly? Was there a risk that the gods would pay less attention to his prayers than to those of Appius Claudius? Did Claudius worship the gods more devoutly or with a purer mind than he did?

Who could find fault with the vows made on behalf of the state by so many plebeian consuls and dictators, either when they were leaving for their armies or in the heat of battle? Let them count the commanders from the years when affairs began to be conducted under plebeian leadership and auspices; let them count the triumphs: by now, even plebeians themselves no longer regret their own nobility. In fact, they were fully convinced that if a war suddenly broke out, the Senate and people of Rome would have as much confidence in plebeian commanders as in patrician ones.

"Given this," he said, "what god or man can think it wrong if those whom you have already honored with curule chairs, the toga praetexta, the palm-fringed tunic, the painted toga, and the triumphal crown and laurel wreath, whose houses you have made stand out by attaching to them the spoils of defeated enemies,  among others, couldn't also be awarded the insignia of pontiffs or augurs? A man who, adorned with the symbols of Jupiter Optimus Maximus, has ridden through the city in a golden chariot, and has ascended the Capitoline Hill, what is wrong with him being seen with a cup and staff of an augur, or with a veiled head as he sacrifices a victim, or takes an augury from the citadel?"

"When the titles of consul, censor, and Triumph are read without offense on a person's statue, will people be upset at the addition of the title of augur or pontiff? In truth, and I say this with respect to the gods, I believe that we, thanks to the kindness of the Roman people, are qualified in such a way that we would bring as much honor to the priesthood as we would receive from it. We could ask, more for the sake of the gods than for ourselves, that those whom we worship privately we may also worship publicly."