**10.8** "But why do I continue as if the cause of the patricians concerning the priesthoods remains unchallenged? Have we not already claimed one high-ranking religious office? We see plebeians serving as decemvirs for performing the sacred rites, interpreting the Sibylline prophecies, and determining the nation's destiny. They also preside over the sacred rites of Apollo and other religious ceremonies. No injustice was done to the patricians when additional duumvirs for performing the sacred rites were appointed in favor of the plebeians. Nor is there any injustice now, when a brave and active tribune wants to add five augur positions and four pontiff positions for plebeians."

"This isn't to oust you, Appius, but to allow plebeians to assist you in managing divine affairs, just as they assist you, to the best of their ability, in other human affairs. Don't be ashamed, Appius, to have a colleague in the priesthood who could also be your colleague in the censorship or consulship. You could serve as his Master of the Horse when he's Dictator, and as Dictator when he's Master of the Horse. Those ancient patricians, where your nobility originated, welcomed into their ranks a Sabine newcomer, either Attius Clausus or Appius Claudius, if you prefer. So, don't disdain to admit us into the priesthood. We bring with us many honors, indeed, all of the same honors which have made you proud. Lucius Sextius was the first plebeian consul; Gaius Licinius Stolo, the first plebeian Master of the Horse; Gaius Marcius Rutilus, the first plebeian Dictator and censor; and Quintus Publilius Philo, the first plebeian praetor." 

"The same arguments have always been heard that you alone have the right to auspices, that you alone have ancestral rights, that you alone were legally entitled to supreme command and auspices in both peace and war. The plebeian and patrician classes have been equally prosperous to this day and will continue to be. Have you ever heard it said, by the way, that the first patricians were created from nothing, as if they were sent down from heaven? They were simply men who could name their fathers, meaning nothing more than that they were freeborn. I can now name a consul as my father, and soon my son will be able to name a consul as his grandfather."

"There is nothing else in the matter, Quirites, except that we may now obtain everything that's been denied to us. The patricians only want a dispute, regardless of the outcome. For my part, I consider this law to be beneficial, auspicious, and prosperous for you and the Republic. I believe this law should be enacted as proposed."