**3.35** When it was announced that election for the decemvirs for the second time would be in ‘market days' away or twenty-four days, a strong desire for power emerged. The most influential men in the state began to campaign for the position, humbly asking for the support of the same plebeians they had often clashed with. I think these men feared that if they didn't fill these powerful posts, they would be filled by men who weren't worthy of them.

The risk of losing his position, despite his past honors and age, motivated Appius Claudius, as one of the decemvirs, to begin acting more like someone campaigning for the role than someone who already held it. It was hard to tell if he was a decemvir or a candidate. Claudius criticized the patricians and praised every minor and humble plebeian candidate. He was often seen flitting around the Forum in the company of former tribunes like the Duillii and the Icilii and used their influence to sell himself to the plebeians.

Claudius' own colleagues, who had previously been loyal to him, started to question his intentions, wondering what he was up to. His sudden friendliness and humility appeared so insincere that they suspected he had some ulterior motive. He was keeping himself under control and lowering himself too much among the plebeians that it seemed he wasn't in a hurry to leave office but, instead, was looking for ways to stay in power.

Not daring to openly oppose his ambition, however, they decided to soften it by humoring him, letting him preside over the elections, as he was the youngest. This was a trick which they thought would prevent Appius Claudius from appointing himself, a move that had never been done, except by the plebeian tribunes, and even then, only as a very bad precedent.

However, Appius Claudius, assuring all that he would conduct the elections properly, saw this obstacle as an opportunity and used it to his advantage. By manipulating a political coalition he managed to block the election of the two Quinctii, Capitolinus and Cincinnatus, and his own uncle, Gaius Claudius, who was one of the staunchest supporters of the patricians, as well as other citizens of high rank. He then helped elect decemvirs who were far from being his equals either socially or politically, appointing himself first of all. This was a move that was heavily criticized by honorable men, who didn't think he would have the audacity to do it.

With him were elected, from the patricians, Marcus Cornelius Maluginensis, Marcus Sergius Esquilinus, Lucius Minucius Esquilinus, and Quintus Fabius Vibulanus, and, from the plebeians, Quintus Poetelius, Titus Antonius Merenda, Caeso Duillius Longus, Spurius Oppius Cornicen, and Manius Rabuleius.