**3.36** This marked the end of Appius Claudius pretending to be someone he wasn't. From this point forward, he started to live according to his true nature and began to mold his new colleagues to match his character before they took office.

The newly elected men had private meetings, daily, away from all witnesses. Then, equipped with their plans for unchecked power, which they developed in absolute secrecy, they stopped hiding their arrogance about it. They made themselves hard to get access to and those who did get access to them were given an unfriendly reception. They dragged things out until the fifteenth of May, which was the traditional time for the magistrates to start their office.

Upon assuming office, the new decemvirs made the first day memorable by creating a scene of great fear. The previous decemvirs had followed the rule that the one person who was in charge that day would have twelve lictors with fasces. Instead, now every decemvir had his own twelve lictors and his own fasces. A total of one-hundred and twenty lictors crowded the Forum, each carrying fasces with axes bound in. The decemvirs explained that the axes should not be removed, since the office they had created was without the right of appeal.

To the people, however, it looked like there were ten kings now. Fear spread not only among the plebeians but also among the leading patricians. They suspected a pretext for bloodshed was being sought. If anyone spoke in defense of freedom, either in the Senate or at a public meeting, the fasces would immediately be brought out to intimidate them.

In addition to the plebeians having no protection now that the right to appeal was abolished, the decemvirs had also agreed not to interfere with each other's sentencing. The previous decemvirs had allowed their legal decisions to be appealed to a colleague, and had referred some matters, which seemed to be outside their own judgment, to the plebeians.

For a while, the fear terrorized all classes equally. Gradually, it began to focus solely on the plebeians. The patricians were left alone, while the lower classes were treated lustfully and cruelly. The people were judged based on who they were, not the merits of their case. Judgments were made in private and then announced in the Forum. If a plebeian appealed to a decemvir's colleague, they were left in such a state that they wished they had accepted the original sentence.

There was also a rumor, without any proof, that the decemvirs had conspired to maintain their tyranny not just for the present, but for the future as well. It was said that the decemvirs had secretly sworn an oath not to hold elections and to keep the decemvirs in power indefinitely.