**1.43** He divided the Roman citizens into five classes based on their wealth:

The First Class consisted of those with one-hundred thousand pounds of aes rude or more. He divided this class into eighty centuries, half older men and half younger men. The older men, called seniors, were tasked with guarding the City, while the younger men, the juniors, were sent to fight wars abroad. Their armor included a helmet, a round shield, greaves, and a breastplate, all made of brass. These were to cover their body. Their weapons were a spear and a sword. Two centuries of unarmed engineers were added to this class, whose job was making war machines.

The Second Class included those with estates ranging from seventy-five thousand to one-hundred thousand pounds of aes rude. They were divided into twenty centuries of seniors and juniors. Their armor was similar to that of the first class, but they carried oblong shields and didn't have a breastplate of bronze.

The Third Class was made up of those with fifty-thousand pounds of aes rude. They had the same number of centuries and similar armor to the Second Class but without greaves.

The Fourth Class, with property worth twenty-five thousand pounds of aes rude. They had the same number of centuries but nothing was given except a spear and a long javelin.

The Fifth Class was the largest, with thirty centuries. They carried slings and stones for throwing. This class also included two centuries of horn-blowers and trumpeters. Their property was valued at eleven thousand pounds of aes rude.

Those with less wealth comprised the rest of the citizens who were grouped into a single century and were exempted from serving in the war. Thus, the infantry was equipped and distributed.

Servius also formed twelve centuries of cavalry from the wealthiest citizens. He also formed six additional centuries under the same names as those inaugurated by Romulus from the three original tribes, Ramnes, Tities, and Luceres. For the purchase of horses they were given ten thousand pounds of aes rude from the public revenue, and certain rich widows were assigned to support the upkeep, each paying two thousand pounds of aes rude per year.

The financial burden was thus shifted from the poor to the rich by Servius. In return, additional privileges were given to the wealthy. Unlike former kings, who had allowed equal voting rights to all individuals, Servius introduced a graduation so that while no one was ostensibly deprived of his vote, all the voting power was concentrated in the hands of the wealthiest men of Rome: the cavalry was called to vote first, then the eighty centuries of the First Class. If they disagreed, which was rare, the centuries of the Second Class were called. The lower classes rarely got a chance to vote. This system ensured that most of the power remained with the wealthiest citizens.

It isn't surprising that the system today, after the expansion to thirty-five tribes and their number doubled by the centuries of the younger and older, doesn't match the total established by Servius Tullius. He divided Rome into four parts, or tribes, based on the regions and hills which were inhabited. The word "tribes" likely came from the word "tribute" because Servius' tax system was based on one's census rating. These original four tribes didn't have anything to do with the distribution or number of centuries, however.