**1.44** King Servius sped up the census by passing a law that threatened those who didn't participate with jail or death. After it was finally completed, he ordered all Roman citizens, both cavalry and infantry, to gather at the Campus Martius at dawn. Each person was to be in their assigned century.

There he surveyed the entire army in formation with their own uniforms. He then purified it with a triple sacrifice of a pig, a sheep, and an ox \[suovetaurilia\]. This marked the official end of the census period, also known as the closing of the lustrum. In the end, it's said that eighty-thousand citizens were counted in the census. However, Fabius Pictor, the oldest source, says this was actually the number of men who were able to bear arms.

It became obvious that the City needed to be bigger to accommodate such a population. Servius added two hills, the Quirinal and the Viminal, and expanded the Esquiline Hill, where he lived to make the area more desirable. He surrounded the City with a rampart, ditches, and a wall.

He also expanded the pomerium, the sacred border of Rome. Some people think the pomerium is the land outside the walls, but it's actually the space on both sides of the wall. When the Etruscans built cities, they would consecrate this space, leaving room inside and outside from where they planned to build the wall. This was so houses wouldn't be built right up against the wall on the inside, and there would be some open space outside. It was this space, which couldn't be farmed or lived in, that was called the pomerium by the Romans. As the City grew bigger, new walls were built further out and, thus, the sacred boundary stones of the pomerium were moved further out, as well.