**1.45** The population and size of the City had now increased, and everything in Rome was now arranged for both war and peace. King Servius wanted to expand Roman power and wealth by diplomacy rather than always relying on arms. At the same time he wanted to add a touch of glory by beautifying the City.

The Temple of Diana in Ephesus was famous at that time and was known to have been built by all the cities of Asia. Being among the leading men of the Latin communities, Servius purposely cultivated friendships both officially and privately with them and greatly praised this cooperation and the uniting of the gods. By often repeating this idea, he eventually convinced the Latin people to build a temple to Diana in Rome together with the Roman people. In a way, this was an admission that Rome was the leader of both nations, a point they had often gone to war over.

Even though the Latins had given up on the idea of superiority over Rome after many failed attempts at war, a Sabine saw an opportunity to regain superiority for his city when a bull of extraordinary size and beauty was born to his family. Its horns, later displayed in the Temple of Diana, were a testament to it as a miracle. The event was seen as a prodigy and seers prophesied that the city of the man that sacrificed this bull to Diana would become an empire.

That prophesy reached the high priest of the Temple of Diana in Rome. The Sabine who owned the cow waited for a day that was suitable for sacrifice and brought the bull to Rome to the Temple of Diana setting it before the altar. The priest, impressed by the greatness of the bull's fame and remembering the prophecy, addressed the Sabine:

"Why are you, stranger, preparing to offer an unclean sacrifice to Diana? Go and bathe yourself first in running water. The Tiber River is flowing down there at the bottom of the valley."

The Sabine, moved by religion, anxious and wanting to do everything properly so that the event might correspond to the prodigy, went to the Tiber River to cleanse himself. Meanwhile, the Roman high priest sacrificed the bull to Diana. This delighted Servius and the people.