**1.46** Time passed and Servius had now been king for a long time. However, he knew that young Lucius Tarquinius often belittled him, saying he wasn't the rightful king because the people hadn't chosen him.

To fight back against this and win the consent of the plebeians, Servius divided the territory he had captured from his enemies among his men. After that, he boldly asked the people if they would consent to him being king. Of course, they all agreed, more than they had for any previous king.

However, the young Tarquinius was unimpressed. He still wanted to be king. Instead of it discouraging him, it was the opposite. He was encouraged. The people had gotten land against the Senate's wishes, he observed, and this was his chance to turn the Senate against Servius and raise his own standing there.

Tarquinius was known for being hot-tempered and ambitious, and his wife, Tullia, inflamed this ambition even further. The crimes that would follow their house in taking power by force would be a legendary tragedy, rivaling those of Ancient Greece, such that royalty would be forever banned, with disgust, in the name of liberty.

It isn't clear whether Lucius Tarquinius was the son or grandson of King Tarquin. I follow the majority of historical writers and say he was his son and he had another son, Aruns Tarquinius, a young man of gentle disposition.

Now, as has been said before, Tarquinius and his brother Aruns were both married to King Servius' daughters, who were completely different in character. The ambitious Tullia the Younger was initially married to the mild-mannered Aruns, while the peaceful Tullia the Elder was married to the fiery Lucius Tarquinius. As Fortune would have it, this arrangement slowed down the two violent partners from getting together so that King Servius' reign would be long enough to cement a national sense of morality among the Roman people.

In time, the ambitious younger Tullia became frustrated with Aruns' lack of ambition or fear of pursuing greatness. She admired her brother-in-law, Tarquinius, and thought he was the one who should be king. She mocked her sister for being too timid and her husband who acted like a woman.

As like attracts like, so does evil attract evil. The beginning of the disturbance came from the woman.

So, Tullia the Younger started spending time with Tarquinius, having secret conversations and talking badly about her husband and her sister. She had no scruples about doing this, telling Tarquinius that it would be better for her to be a widow and he a bachelor than their mutual ambitiousness be stifled by people who were unworthy and weak. If the gods had given her a husband worthy of her, she said, she would already be seeing a crown in her own home, like the one she saw at her father's.

She quickly infected young Tarquinius, as he shared her ambitions. It's written that Aruns and the elder Tullia mysteriously died, as Tarquinius and the ambitious younger Tullia held funerals almost back-to-back which emptied their houses for a new marriage. And soon afterward, they married. Servius didn't forbid the marriage nor did he approve of it. However, he gave in and didn't stop them.