**4.50** Back at camp, the words of Postumius had reached the soldiers and inflamed their anger: was the one who stole the spoils and cheated his soldiers also threatening to harm them, as well? As the soldiers' anger became more open, Publius Sestius, the quaestor, thought he could stop the rebellion with the same force that started it. When he sent a lictor to arrest a shouting soldier, a fight broke out. Sestius himself was hit with a stone and had to leave the crowd. The person who threw the stone sarcastically noted that the quaestor got what he deserved for serving a commander who was threatening his soldiers with punishment.

Postumius was recalled back to the camp because of the disturbance. He acted with even more severity in his harsh interrogations, imposing cruel punishments which only made things worse. Finally, when he could no longer control his anger, he ordered certain men to be crushed to death under a wicker frame piled with rocks. A crowd gathered shouting in protest. Foolishly, Postumius ran down from his platform to those who were interrupting the executions of their comrades. When the lictors and centurions tried to break up the crowd by pushing them back, their rough handling ignited such rage that Consular Tribune Postumius was stoned to death by his own army.

When news of this terrible act reached Rome, the consular tribunes tried to get the Senate to investigate the death of Postumius, as he was still their colleague. But the plebeian tribunes vetoed it. This disagreement was part of a larger political conflict. The patricians were worried that, out of fear of the investigations and in anger, the plebeians might elect consular tribunes from among themselves. So the patricians did everything they could to get consuls elected instead.

When the plebeian tribunes blocked the Senate's decree to investigate the murder of Postumius, and also vetoed the election of consuls, the state reverted to an interregnum. In the end, the patricians won.