**5.29**The actions of the plebeian tribunes were still ongoing. The plebeians worked hard to keep people in office who supported the bill allowing them to move to Veii, while the patricians worked hard to re-elect those who would veto it. However, the plebeians were more successful in electing their preferred magistrates. The patricians retaliated by passing a Senate decree to elect consuls, a position disliked by the plebeians.

Thus, after fifteen years without consuls, Lucius Lucretius Flavus and Servius Sulpicius Camerinus were elected as the next consuls. At the start of this year, the plebeian tribunes worked together to pass the law to move to Veii, as none of their colleagues were likely to oppose them. However, the new consuls resisted them with equal determination. Everyone in the state was focused on this one idea.

Meanwhile, the Aequians attacked Vitellia, a Roman colony in their territory. Most of the colonists managed to escape unharmed, as the town had been captured at night by betrayal. The darkness obscured the colonists allowing them to freely escape through the back of the city, and they fled to Rome. This province was assigned to Consul Lucius Lucretius who marched out with an army, defeated the enemy in battle, and returned to Rome victorious, only to face a more serious challenge.

A trial date had been set for Aulus Verginius and Quintus Pomponius, the plebeian tribunes from two years prior. The Senate, by general agreement, supported their defense, feeling that the honor of the Senate was at stake. The only accusation against them was that they had vetoed the plebeian law moving to Veii in order to please the patricians. However, the anger of the plebeians overpowered the influence of the Senate, and shameful precedent was set when these innocent men were condemned to pay a fine of ten thousand pounds aes rude each. This greatly angered the patricians.

Camillus openly accused the plebeians of a serious breach of duty. By punishing their own tribunes for using their legal veto, he said, they hadn't realized the broader consequences of their action. By condemning the tribunes for interceding, using their right to veto, they were undermining the legality of that constitutional safeguard. By removing that intercession, the veto, the tribunes lose their power to check other magistrates.

If they believed the patricians would tolerate the unchecked power of the plebeian tribunes, they were mistaken. If the power of the plebeian tribunes couldn't be resisted by the veto of another plebeian tribune, the patricians would find another weapon. He also criticized the consuls for silently allowing the plebeian tribunes to be condemned, though they acted in accordance with the Senate's authority and expected protection from them. By openly expressing these views daily, he continuously inflamed the anger of the people.