**5.30** Camillus continued to encourage the Senate to resist the law allowing the plebeians to move to Veii. When the day to propose the law came, he urged them to approach the Forum with the mindset of men who remembered they were fighting for their homes, their altars and temples of their gods, and the land of their birth. Selfishly, if he could consider his own glory during this struggle, it would absolutely be an honor for him to see a city he had captured now successful and thriving with inhabitants. He would take pleasure in the daily reminder of his Triumph, and the sight of a city that bore witness to his victory. However, it was wrong for a city deserted and abandoned by the gods to be repopulated. It was wrong for a large swath of Roman people to mass migrate and go live in a conquered city. The Romans would be exchanging their victorious fatherland for a defeated one, he said.

Inspired by their leader's words, patricians, both young and old, came to the Forum in a procession when the law was about to be proposed. They spread out among the tribes, each passionately pleading with members of their own tribe to not abandon the City for which they and their ancestors had bravely and successfully fought, pointing to the Capitoline Hill, the Temple of Vesta, and the other temples of the gods. They pleaded for them not to force the Roman people, as refugees and outcasts, from their homeland and household gods into the defeated city of an enemy. Please, they begged, don't bring about a situation where it would have been better if Veii hadn't been captured, lest Rome be abandoned.

Because they didn't resort to force, but to pleas, and because they frequently invoked the gods during these pleas, many were swayed by religious concerns. More tribes rejected the law than approved it. This victory was so pleasing to the patricians that the next day, at the consuls' suggestion, the Senate passed a decree stating that seven jugera of Veiian land per person should be distributed to the plebeians. This wasn't only for the heads of families, but also for each freeborn child in their households, so that, with such a prospect before them, they might be encouraged to raise children in the hope of land ownership.