**5.31** The plebeians were swayed by such a generous act and, as such, they didn't resist the holding of elections for consuls. Lucius Valerius Potitus for the second time and Marcus Manlius, who later earned the surname of Capitolinus, were elected as consuls.

These consuls hosted the Great Games that Marcus Furius Camillus, as Dictator, had promised during the Veiian war. In the same year, the Temple of Juno Regina, also promised by the same Dictator during the same war, was dedicated. It's reported that the dedication was met with great enthusiasm by the women.

A minor war was fought with the Aequians on Mount Algidus, with the enemies fleeing almost before the battle began. Valerius was granted a Triumph for his relentless pursuit of the fleeing enemies; it was decided that Manlius should enter the City with an ovation.

The same year saw the start of a new war with the Volsinians in the Etruscan territory. However, an army couldn't be sent due to famine and disease in Roman territories, said to be caused by drought and extreme heat. This led the Volsinii, in alliance with the Salpinati who were puffed up with arrogance, to make an unprovoked attack on the Roman territories. War was then declared against the two states.

Gaius Julius died during his term as Censor; Marcus Cornelius was appointed in his place. This move was later seen as a religious transgression, as Rome was captured during that lustrum. Since then, no Censor has ever had a substitute after dying while in office. The consuls had become sick with the disease affecting Rome, so it was decided to renew the auspices through an interregnum.

Following a decree from the Senate, the consuls resigned their positions. Marcus Furius Camillus was then appointed as interrex. He, in turn, appointed Publius Cornelius Scipio as interrex, who later appointed Lucius Valerius Potitus as interrex. Potitus then appointed six consular tribunes. This was done to ensure that if one of them fell ill, there would still be enough magistrates to run the state.