**5.51** "Romans, I found disputes with the plebeian tribunes so bitter that, during my sad exile in Ardea, my only comfort was being away from these conflicts. Because of them, even if the Senate's decree and the plebeians' order recalled me a thousand times, I would never have returned."

"My decision to return now isn't because of a change in my feelings; it's because of a change in your circumstances. The issue was whether my City should stay in its established place, not whether I should live inside it. I'd gladly rest now and not speak, but the current struggle is also about the survival of Rome. To abandon her, while life remains, would be shameful for others, and, in the eyes of Camillus, it would also be sacrilegious."

"Why did we reclaim our City? Why did we save it from the enemy's siege if we're just going to abandon it now that it has been recovered? When the Gauls were victorious and the whole City was captured, both the gods and the Romans still held and lived in the Capitoline Hill and Citadel. Now that the Romans are victorious and the City has been reclaimed, should we abandon the Capitoline Hill and the Citadel? Should our success cause more damage to this City than our defeat did? Even if we didn't have religious traditions established for us and handed down at the same time as the founding of the city, nevertheless, the divine power has clearly shown its support for the Roman state in this crisis. I believe that people understand this now and the neglect of divine worship is no longer an option for men."

"Consider the events of the past few years, both good and bad. You'll see that everything went well for us when we followed the gods, and badly when we ignored them. The Veiian war, which lasted many years and required a lot of effort, didn't end until we drained the water from the Alban Lake as the gods advised. What about the recent disaster in our City? Didn't it happen after we ignored the heavenly warning about the Gauls' approach? After our ambassadors broke the Law of Nations and we didn't punish them for it, was this not neglecting our religious duties? As a result, we were defeated, captured, and ransomed. We suffered such punishments from gods and men that we're now a lesson to the whole world."

"Then our misfortunes reminded us of our religious duties. We fled to the Capitoline Hill and turned to the gods and to the seat of Jupiter Optimus Maximus. Despite losing everything, we hid our sacred objects in the ground or took them to nearby cities to keep them away from the eyes of the enemy. Although we were abandoned by gods and men, we didn't stop worshipping the gods. In return, they have given us back our City, our victory, and the ancient glory of war we had lost. And against the enemy, those blinded by greed who broke the treaty and good faith in the weighing of gold, the gods have inflicted terror, flight, and death."