**5.54** "Imagine, if due to some unfortunate accident, a fire starts in Veii and the wind spreads the flames, causing a significant part of the city to burn. Would we then look to move to Fidenae, Gabii, or some other city? Doesn't the soil of our City mean more to us, this land we call our mother? Does our love for our City rest only in buildings and rafters? And yet, though I am reluctant to point out your past wrongs to me, I must admit that during my absence, I often thought of my City. I remembered the hills, the plains, the Tiber River, the familiar landscapes, and the sky under which I was born and raised. I hope, Quirites, these memories encourage you to stay in your current homes, rather than leave and regret it later."

"There is a reason why this place was chosen by gods and men to establish the City: the healthiest hills, the convenient river that allows for transportation of crops from inland, and by which supplies from the sea are received, its close enough to the sea for convenience without the dangers of foreign fleets, and its central location in Italy, perfectly suited for the City to grow. The size of our relatively new City is evidence of this. Quirites, this is the three hundred and sixty-fifth year of our City. For this long you have been at war with nations that have existed for much longer. Yet, you have not only held your own against individual cities, but also against the combined forces of the Volscians and the Aequians, with so many strong towns, and all of the Etruscans, powerful by land and sea in a region that spans the width of Italy."

"Given these facts, what, in heaven's name, is the wisdom in abandoning what has been tested to try something new? Even if you take your courage elsewhere, the fortune of this place can't be moved. Here is the Capitoline Hill, where a human head was unearthed, and it was prophesied that this place would be the head of the world and the main seat of power. Here, when the Capitoline Hill was being consecrated through augury, the gods of youth and boundaries, Juventas and Terminus, to the great joy of our ancestors, refused to be moved. Here are the sacred fires of Vesta, here are the Ancilia shields of Mars sent down from heaven, here are all the gods who will rain blessings upon you if you stay."