**5.39** The Gauls were astounded by the miracle of such a sudden victory. Initially, they were paralyzed with fear, unsure of what had occurred. Then they suspected ambushes, but eventually began to gather the spoils of the slain and stack up weapons in piles, as was their custom. When they saw no signs of hostility, they entered the road to begin their march, and not long before sunset they reached Rome.

From the latest reconnaissance reports from their horsemen, the Gauls learned that the gates of the City were left open. No one was guarding the gates. No armed men were seen on the walls. They were again surprised, as if it were another miracle, yet skeptical and fearful of the night and the unknown layout of the City. So, they decided to set up camp between Rome and the Anio River. They sent out scouts around the walls and the other gates to see what plan the enemy might have in this desperate situation.

Since most men had fled from the battlefield to Veii than to Rome, the Romans believed that no one had survived except those who had taken refuge in Rome. Everyone was in a state of mourning, filling the whole city with lamentations for the living and the dead. The news of the approaching enemy shifted their focus from personal grief to public terror. Soon they heard the howling and dissonant chants of the barbarians outside, wandering around the walls in groups which kept them in a state of constant fear.

From then on, the Romans remained in suspense until dawn. It seemed repeatedly as if an assault on the City was imminent; first, because of the enemy's arrival when they approached the City, they would have stayed at the Allia River unless this was part of their plan. Then, as the sun set, since not much of the day remained, it seemed they would invade before nightfall. Then it appeared that they had postponed their attack into the night to cause more fear. Finally, the approaching dawn brought more terror followed by real danger when the enemy's standards were brought threateningly to the gates. However, neither that night nor the following day, the citizens who stayed behind didn't resemble those who had fled so fearfully at the Battle of Allia.

Since there was no hope of defending the City with such a small remaining force, it was decided that any young men fit for military service and the more capable members of the Senate, along with their families, would retreat to the Citadel and Capitoline Hill. There, with weapons and food supplies collected, they would defend from their fortified position the gods, the people, and the great name of Rome.

The flamen and the vestal priestesses were tasked with moving the sacred objects of the state religion far from the bloodshed and flames, ensuring that the worship would continue as long as there were people left to carry it out. The Romans believed that if the Citadel and Capitoline Hill, the home of the gods; if the Senate, the head of public wisdom; and if the young men capable of bearing arms survived the imminent fall of the City, then the loss of the crowd of elderly men left behind, who were bound to die anyway, would be bearable.

To help the plebeian population accept this more calmly, the old men, who had Triumphed and those who had been consuls, declared publicly that they would stay behind and die with those others, their bodies incapable of bearing arms in defense of the City and not wanting to burden the limited resources of the armed men.