**5.40** Such was the comfort the elders offered each other as they faced their impending death. The elder leaders then encouraged the group of young men, leading them to the Capitoline Hill and the Citadel and entrusting to their bravery and their youth the remaining fate of a City that had been victorious in all its wars for three hundred and sixty years, whatever fortune might now remain.

The departure of the young men who carried with them all hope and help, from those who had decided not to survive the capture and destruction of their City, was truly heartbreaking. Yet the women's tears and their frantic running back and forth in confusion, asking their husbands and sons to what fate they were being abandoned, and to whom they should entrust themselves, only added to the final touch of human misery.

However, a large part of of these women followed their loved ones into the Citadel. No one stopped them or called them back. It would have been beneficial for the defenders of Rome to reduce the number of civilians in the Citadel, but not very humane. The rest of the crowd, mainly plebeians who were unfit for war, who couldn't fit on the small hill or be sustained due to the lack of food, poured out of the City in a continuous stream and headed to the Janiculum Hill. From there, some scattered across the countryside, some headed for the nearby cities, each without any leader or permission, following their own hopes and plans, as the public's plans were considered lost.

Meanwhile, the Flamen Quirinalis and the Vestal Virgins, disregarding their personal concerns, debated which sacred items should be taken with them and which should be left behind, as they couldn't carry everything and considered where to store them for safe keeping. They decided to place the best sacred objects in earthen jars and bury them in the shrine next to the house of the Flamen Quirinalis, in a place where it's now considered disrespectful to spit. They divided the remaining items among themselves and carried them away, taking the road that leads to the Janiculum Hill across the Sublician Bridge.

As they were climbing the slope, Lucius Albinius, a Roman plebeian, who was transporting his wife and children in a wagon, saw them among the rest of the crowd who, unfit for war, were leaving the City. He felt it was a religious offense that the public priests and sacred items of the Roman people should walk while he and his family rode in a wagon. He ordered his wife and children to get out, put the Vestal Virgins and sacred items in the wagon, and took them to Caere, where the priestesses had planned to go.