**5.41** Meanwhile, in Rome, after all things possible under the current circumstances had been done to prepare the Citadel for defense, the crowd of elderly men returned to their homes, waiting for the arrival of the enemy, firmly resolved to face death.

The men who had held high curule offices, wishing to die wearing the insignia or medals of their former rank, honors, and virtue they had been given, were to sit in ivory chairs in the center of their houses, wearing the official robes they had worn when leading the sacred chariots or celebrating a Triumph. Some say that, after Marcus Folius, the Pontifex Maximus, spoke a prayer, the men recited the solemn pledge in which they devoted themselves to death for the sake of Rome and the Roman Quirites.

Meanwhile, the Gauls' anger from the battle cooled during the night. Because they had never fought in a battle in the field, and had not yet taken the City by force or assault, they entered the next day without rage or intensity through the open Colline Gate. Arriving at the Forum, they calmly observed the temples of the gods and the Citadel, the only places that showed signs of war. Then, leaving a small garrison behind to prevent any surprise attacks from the Citadel or Capitoline Hill, they dispersed in search of loot. The deserted streets led some of the Gauls to the nearest houses, while others sought out distant houses, expecting untouched treasures.

The strange, eerie silence soon made the Gauls feel uneasy, however. They became suspicious that they were falling into a trap. So, they regrouped back in the Forum and nearby areas, describing the sight of plebeian houses which had been locked shut, yet houses of the nobility, in contrast, had been flung wide open to their main halls. The Gauls were much more hesitant to enter these open houses than the closed houses. They gazed with awe and respect at the sight of these old men sitting inside the vestibules of their houses waiting for them, not just because of their dazzling attire nor their majestic demeanor, but also because they held solemn, serious expressions on their faces as if they were gods.

As the Gauls stood before them, gazing at the elderly patricians as if they were statues,, it's said that a Gaul stroked the beard of one of them, Marcus Papirius, which he wore long, as they all did then. In return, Marcus hit him on the head with his ivory staff. This act sparked the beginning of the slaughter, with the elderly patricians being the first to be killed in their seats. After this, no human life was spared. Houses were looted and then, once emptied, they were set on fire.