**5.43** The Gauls, after several days of fruitless warfare among the City's buildings, realized that all that remained among the fires and ruins of the conquered City were the armed defenders. Despite the numerous calamities, the Romans weren't frightened, nor were they considering surrender unless forced. The Gauls decided to resort to drastic measures and attack the Citadel.

At dawn, a signal was given, and the entire mob of Gauls assembled in the Forum. From there, they moved forward, shouting their war cry and raising their shields above their heads in testudo formation. The Romans didn't act rashly or in confusion; they fortified the guards at every entry point to the Citadel. They positioned their strongest forces where they saw the Gallic soldiers advancing and allowed the enemy to climb. The higher the Gauls climbed, the easier it would be to push them back down.

As the Gauls were halfway up the ascent, the Romans launched a counterattack. From higher ground, they charged down the hill, using momentum to their advantage. The speed and force of the resulting collision caused a rout as the enemy soldiers were knocked off the cliff to their deaths. They defeated the Gauls with such shocking casualties and chaos that the Gauls retreated, never attempting this strategy again.

Having abandoned their hopes of victory through a frontal attack, the Gauls prepared for a siege. Until that point, the Gauls hadn't considered the idea of a siege and, as such, they had destroyed all the food in the City as they burned it. They then discovered that all the produce had been transported from the Roman countryside to Veii by fleeing Romans. Consequently, the Gauls divided their army, deciding that one part should loot neighboring states while the other part continued the Citadel's siege. This way, the plunderers could provide the besiegers with grain.

The Gauls who left the City were guided by Fortune herself to test the courage of the Romans at Ardea, where Marcus Furius Camillus was in exile. Camillus, more upset by the state of the Republic than his own situation, was growing old blaming both gods and men, indignantly wondering where the men were who had fought with him at Veii and Falerii. These men had won wars more through their own bravery than through luck.

Suddenly, Camillus heard that the Gauls' army was approaching and that the frightened leaders of Ardea were now anxiously deliberating the matter.

He had generally avoided council meetings, but now, as if driven by divine inspiration, Camillus stepped into the middle of the assembly and addressed them as follows: