**5.27** The Faliscans had a tradition of hiring one person to serve as both a tutor and attendant of multiple children, and several boys were entrusted to the care of one at the same time, a practice that still exists in Greece today. He educated the sons of influential families because he was believed to be an educated, knowledgeable scholar.

In one Faliscan leader's family, their tutor had established a routine during peacetime of taking the children outside the city for games and exercise. This routine wasn't abandoned during the war. He would lead them away from the city gates, sometimes on short trips, sometimes on longer ones for games and varied conversations.

When the opportunity arose, the tutor led them further than usual between the enemy's posts and from there he led them into the Roman camp, straight to Camillus' tent. He then followed this wicked deed with an even more villainous speech, claiming that he had handed Falerii into the hands of the Romans by giving them these children, whose parents were the city's leaders.

When Camillus heard this, he responded, "You have come, wicked man, with a wicked gift, to a people and a commander who are not like you. There is no treaty between us and the Faliscans, but there is a natural, common bond between us that will always exist. There are laws of war just as there are of peace, and we have learned to exercise them justly as well as bravely. We don't wage war against children, who are spared when cities are captured, but against armed men who attacked the Roman camp at Veii without provocation. You, as far as it was in your power, have defeated them through a new wickedness. I will conquer them in the Roman way, just as I did Veii: with Roman tactics, bravery, hard work, and weapons."

Camillus then stripped the man naked, tied his hands behind his back, and handed him over to the Faliscan children to be returned to Falerii. He gave them rods to whip the traitor as they drove him into their city. This spectacle drew a large crowd, and the senate of Falerii was called into session due to the extraordinary event. The men underwent such a change of heart, that those who a short time before, in the fury of their hate and resentment of the Romans would almost have preferred the doom of the Veientes to the peace of the Capenates, began to demand peace with the voice of the entire city. The honesty of the Romans and the justice of the commander were universally praised in the Falerii marketplace and their senate-house. With the consent of all, ambassadors were then sent to Camillus' camp and, with his permission, to Rome to surrender Falerii to the Roman Senate.

When they appeared before the Senate, they reportedly said, "Senators, we surrender to you and your commander, defeated by a victory that neither god nor man can find fault with. Nothing could be more glorious for a conqueror. We believe we will live happier lives under your rule than under our own laws. This war has provided two beneficial lessons for humanity. You chose honor in war over immediate victory, and we, inspired by your honor, have willingly surrendered the victory to you. We're under your rule. Send people to collect our weapons, our hostages, and our city with its gates wide open. You'll never regret our loyalty, and we will never regret your rule."

Both the enemy and his own people gave thanks to Camillus. The Faliscans were asked to pay the soldiers for that year so that the Roman people wouldn't need to pay the tribute.

Then, after peace was granted, the army returned to Rome.