**5.28** When Camillus came back home, praise for him was far greater than when his white horses had carried him through the City in Triumph. He had defeated the enemy through justice and good faith. The Senate received him in reverent silence and immediately worked to fulfill his vow. To carry the golden bowl as a gift to Apollo at Delphi, they appointed Lucius Valerius, Lucius Sergius, and Aulus Manlius, who were sent in one long ship. However, the men were intercepted by the Liparian pirates near the Strait of Sicily and taken to their city. Lipari was an island nation which had a tradition of piracy. It was customary for the government to distribute the spoils the pirates acquired to the public.

That year, a man named Timasitheus was the chief magistrate for the Lipari people. However, he was more like the Romans than his own people. Upon learning they were Roman ambassadors, and out of reverence for the offering, the god it was intended for, and the reason for the offering, he himself was filled with religious awe. He inspired the same reverence in his fellow countrymen, who were almost always inclined to follow their leader.

After providing the ambassadors with his hospitality and a place to stay, he provided an escort of ships, accompanying them to Delphi and then escorted them safely back to Rome. The Senate issued a formal bond of hospitality making Timasitheus a guest and friend of Rome for his work, presenting him with gifts from the state.

That same year, the war with the Aequians had mixed results. It was unclear, both to the soldiers and those in Rome, whether they had won or lost. The Roman commanders were Gaius Aemilius and Spurius Postumius, both consular tribunes. Initially, they worked together. After the enemy was defeated in the field, it was decided that Aemilius would hold Verrugo with his garrison, while Postumius would ravage the Aequian countryside.

Postumius, however, was careless and his troops were in disorganized columns while returning from their plundering. The Aequians attacked, throwing the Romans into a panic which caused them to retreat to the nearest hills. Fear spread back to the Verrugo garrison, as well as the rest of the army. After gathering them together in a safe place, Postumius scolded his troops for their fear and for retreating from a cowardly enemy who was notorious for running away. The entire army shouted out that he was right, admitting the disgrace, and promised to ensure that the enemy wouldn't be able to savor their victory for long. They demanded that Postumius lead them, at once, to the enemy's camp, still visible from their location, and they said he could punish them in any way he liked if they didn't capture the camp by nightfall. Postumius praised them and ordered them to eat, rest their bodies, and be ready by the fourth watch.

The enemy, suspecting a night attack, positioned themselves to block the Romans on the road from the hill to the Verrugo garrison. So, the battle was fought before daybreak, although the moon shone all night long. The battle was just as intense and decisive as a daytime battle. However, the shouting and noise of the battle could be heard from Verrugo which made the Roman garrison panic and think their camp was under attack. Despite Aemilius' pleas and attempts to stop them, the soldiers fled to Tusculum in disarray. From there, rumors reached Rome that Postumius and his army had been slaughtered.

When daylight showed the fear of an ambush was baseless, Postumius rode past the battle line, renewing his promises of reward. This inspired them so much that the Aequians could no longer resist the assault and the slaughter of the fleeing soldiers, an act driven more by rage than courage or honor, leading to the complete destruction of the enemy. The grim news from Tusculum, which had caused unnecessary panic in Rome, was followed by a laurel-wreathed letter from Postumius, announcing that victory belonged to the Roman people and the Aequian army had been destroyed.