**2.10** On the appearance of the enemy, the plebeians out in the country fled into the City as best they could. The weak places in the defenses were occupied by military posts. Beyond this, the walls of the City and the Tiber River were deemed sufficient for protection.

However, the Sublician bridge, spanning the Tiber, was a weakness. The enemy would have forced their way over it had it not been for one man, Horatius Cocles. He was the guard at the bridge that day. When he saw the Janiculum Hill taken by a surprise attack and the enemy rushing down from there, he noticed his own terrified men were throwing down their arms and deserting their posts. He stopped them one by one, appealing to remember their duty to their gods and their people. Running away from the situation wouldn't help, he said. The enemy would easily cross the bridge and soon be on the Palatine Hill and the Capitoline Hill. In fact, there would be more enemies there than would be on the Janiculum Hill. He shouted at them to, instead, destroy the bridge by fire, by sword, or by whatever means they could, and promised to hold off the enemy as much as one man could.

Cocles ran to the entrance of the bridge, standing out among those who were retreating, and faced the enemy, impressing them with such bravado. Two men, Spurius Larcius and Titus Herminius, both from famous families and known for brave deeds, also stayed with him due to their sense of honor. The men faced the initial danger and the worst part of the battle together. When those who were tasked with destroying the bridge called for them all to retreat, Cocles made them move to a safe part of the bridge. He then looked at all the Etruscan officers, challenging them and accusing them of being slaves to tyrants who were trying to take away the freedom of others.

The Etruscans hesitated, looking at each other, unsure of who should start the fight. Eventually, they were moved by shame and started hurling javelins at him from all sides. All the javelins stuck in his raised shield, but Cocles held his ground, maintaining his position on the bridge. The Etruscans then tried to push him off the bridge, but then retreated in panic when they were interrupted by the sound of the bridge starting to come apart and fall, along with the cheering of the Romans. Cocles then shouted a prayer:

"Father Tiber, I solemnly invoke you! Receive these arms and this soldier into your merciful stream!"

He then jumped into the Tiber River in full armor and, under a shower of Etruscan missiles, swam across the river unharmed, back to the Romans.

As far as posterity is concerned, in my opinion, this story is likely to have been popular, though not as believable. Regardless, the City was grateful for his bravery and erected a statue of him in the Forum. He was also given as much land as he could plow in one day. Private citizens also showed their appreciation. Even though they were poor, each gave him something from their own supplies, depriving themselves to reward his bravery.