**2.15** Spurius Larcius and Titus Herminius were the next consuls for the following year. Then, after that year, Publius Lucretius and Publius Valerius, also known as Publicola, were next chosen as consuls.

In that year, ambassadors from King Porsena arrived for the final time, discussing the possibility of restoring Tarquinius to the throne. The Senate didn't give an answer but responded by sending Porsena an official delegation of the most distinguished senators. While a simple answer could have been provided to Porsena's ambassadors in Rome, the delegation wanted to ensure that the topic would be closed forever. They wanted to prevent any kind of disruption to their mutual goodwill by Porsena continuing to make requests for the Tarquin family. These requests by Porsena were clearly against the freedom of the Roman people and would never be approved, but they didn't want to deny Porsena anything unless his request would lead to Rome's own downfall.

The delegation from the Senate helped King Porsena understand that the Roman people were no longer under a king, but were free, and would rather welcome enemies than kings. They wished for their City to exist as long as there was freedom. If Porsena wanted Rome to be safe, they asked him to let it be free. The king, humbled, said, "Since you're so determined, I'll not bother you with these matters again, nor will I give false hope to the Tarquin family. Whether they need peace or war, they should look elsewhere for their exile, so that nothing disrupts the peace that you and I have." He followed his kind words with kind actions, returning the remaining Roman hostages and returning the land to the Veientes, which had been taken by the treaty at the Janiculum.

Tarquinius and his family, now with no hope of returning to Rome as their king, went to Tusculum to live in exile with his son-in-law, Octavius Mamilius. This ensured the peace between King Porsena and the Romans was maintained.