**3.17** When the news broke that the soldiers were laying down their weapons and leaving their posts, Consul Publius Valerius quickly left the Senate and ran to the tribunes in the Comitium. Consul Claudius was left to keep the Senate together.

"What is happening here?" Valerius asked the tribunes. "Are you planning to overthrow the Republic under the guidance and auspices of this rebel leader, Appius Herdonius? Was he so successful in corrupting you, that he didn't need to stir up the slaves to join him? When the enemies are over our heads, is that when you want us to drop all our weapons and propose laws?"

Then, turning to the multitude, he said, "Quirites, if you don't care about your City or yourselves, at least respect your own gods and their temples, which are now held captive by the enemy. Jupiter Optimus Maximus, Juno Regina, Minerva, and the other gods and goddesses are under siege. A camp of slaves holds your gods, the public guardians of the Roman state."

"Does this seem like a healthy situation? There are enemies not just within our walls, but barricaded inside our Citadel, overlooking the Forum and Curia. Yet, it's business as usual. Meetings are still being held in the Forum; the Senate is in session inside the Curia, just as if everything were peaceful. The senator gives his opinion, the other Romans cast their votes. It's as if we were doing this at leisure."

"Shouldn't all patricians and plebeians, consuls, tribunes, gods, and men rush to the Capitoline Hill with weapons in their hands, to liberate and purify that most sacred house of Jupiter Optimus Maximus? Father Romulus! Inspire your descendants with the same determination you had when you reclaimed the Citadel from these same Sabines when they had captured it using gold. Let them follow the same path you and your army took. I, as Consul, will be the first to follow you and your footsteps, as much as a mortal can follow a god."

He ended his speech by saying that he would take up arms, and called on all Quirites to arm themselves. If anyone obstructed him, whether a consul, a tribune, even the sacred laws, whoever it might be, wherever they might be, on the Capitoline Hill or in the Forum, they would be treated as an enemy. He would ignore the limits to his power as a consul. Should the tribunes order arms to be taken up against Consul Publius Valerius as they had prohibited taking up arms against Appius Herdonius, he threatened that he would do to the tribunes what the head of his family had dared to do against the kings.

It was evident that Roman sedition was about to erupt in the City and the spectacle would be a delight to the enemy. However, the Terentillian Law couldn't be voted upon, nor would the Consul go to the Capitoline Hill, as nightfall ultimately put an end to the conflict; the tribunes retired, fearing the consuls' military power. With the instigators of the revolt gone, the patricians then went among the plebeians, joining their conversations and offering advice. The patricians warned the plebeians to be careful of the danger they were putting the state in; that the fight wasn't between the patricians and the plebeians, but that both groups, together, had given the Citadel of the City, the temples of the gods, and the protective gods of the state and private families, into the hands of the enemies.

While these discussions were taking place in the Forum to calm the disturbances, the consuls, in the meantime, had dispersed around the City gates and walls, in case the Sabines or the Veientes were stirred to action.