**3.43** To the defeats suffered by the enemy, the decemvirs added two heinous crimes, one abroad and one inside the City.

In the Sabine region, a Roman leader named Lucius Siccius was believed to have secretly discussed the decemvirs' envy of tribunes and sowing ideas of secession with a crowd of soldiers. So, as a ruse, the decemvirs sent him ahead to choose a campsite. The soldiers who were sent with him were instructed to attack and kill him whenever the opportunity arose. However, the soldiers didn't kill him without consequences, for some fell around him and died while Siccius, a man of great strength and courage, defended himself.

The remaining soldiers returned to the camp and reported that Siccius had been ambushed while fighting bravely, and some soldiers had died with him. At first, everyone believed their story. But later, a cohort of soldiers who had been allowed by the decemvirs to bury the dead noticed that none of the bodies had been stripped of their belongings. And Lucius Siccius was found in the center, surrounded by the bodies of the fallen soldiers, all facing him. There were no Sabine bodies or signs of their retreat. The soldiers brought back Siccius' body, claiming that he had been killed by his own men.

The news filled the camp with outrage. There were plans to bring Lucius Siccius' body back to Rome immediately, but the decemvirs quickly arranged a military funeral for him at public expense. He was buried amidst the soldiers' deep sorrow, and the decemvirs' reputation among the plebeians was severely damaged.