**3.46** The crowd was now stirred up, and it seemed like a fight was about to break out. The lictors had positioned themselves around Lucius Icilius, but they didn't take any action beyond making threats.

Appius said that Lucius Icilius wasn't defending Verginia. Instead, as a restless man with a desire for power, Icilius was merely looking for a reason to cause trouble. He wouldn't give Icilius satisfaction today and wouldn't be giving in to Icilius' demands. Rather, he would honor the absent Verginius and the concept of fatherhood and freedom. Therefore, he wouldn't decide today, nor would he issue a decree. He would ask Marcus Claudius to withdraw his legal claim and allow the girl to remain in provisional custody until the following day. However, if the father didn't show up the next day, he warned Icilius and his supporters, he wouldn't hesitate to enforce his own law and show them that a decemvir would not lack firmness. And he wouldn't need the help of his colleagues' lictors to suppress the agitators; his own lictors would be enough.

When the unjust act was postponed and Verginia's supporters had left, it was decided that Icilius' brother and Numitorius' son, both energetic young men, should go straight to the gates of the camp and bring Lucius Verginius as quickly as possible. Verginia's safety depended on him being there the next day to protect her. They quickly left, and riding at full speed delivered the message to her father.

Meanwhile, Marcus Claudius was pressuring Icilius to provide sureties that guaranteed the girl's appearance. Icilius told him that was exactly what he was doing, intentionally delaying the proceedings to give the messengers sent to the camp to fetch Verginius enough time for their journey. The crowd raised their hands in support of Icilius, and everyone was ready to vouch for him. With tears in his eyes he said, "I'm so thankful for your help. I'll need your help tomorrow. For now, I have enough sureties." Thus, Verginia was released to her relatives who put up the necessary amount.

Not wanting to seem like he was only there for this case, Appius Claudius remained on the bench for a while. When no one else came forward, he went home and wrote to his colleagues at Verginius' camp, instructing them not to give Verginius leave and to keep him under guard. However, this evil plan was too late, as Verginius had already been granted leave and had already left during the first watch of the night. The letter regarding his detention arrived the next morning, but it was too late.