**3.50** Some of the younger patricians were sent to the camp on Mount Vecilius, tasked with informing the three decemvirs who were in command that the decemvirs were to prevent the soldiers from rebelling by all means.

However, when he arrived back at camp, Verginius caused an even greater commotion than the one he left in the City. He was seen coming with a force of nearly four-hundred men from Rome who joined him as companions from the City, inflamed by the indignity of the affair. His bloody appearance, still gripping the knife, alarmed the soldiers. Moreover, the sight of so many togas seen in the camp created the appearance of a much larger City crowd than it actually was. When asked what had happened, Verginius wept. He was too upset to say anything. Finally, when the noise of the approaching crowd subsided and there was silence, he explained everything in the order that it had happened.

Holding his hands out to appeal, he pleaded with his fellow soldiers not to blame him for the crime committed by Appius Claudius or shun him as a murderer. He said that his daughter's life would have been dearer to him if she had been allowed to live free and chaste. When he saw her being dragged off for the sole purpose of raping her like a slave, he considered it better for her to die than to suffer for the rest of her life. His feeling of pity led him into a semblance of cruelty. He would have taken his own life too, if he hadn't had the hope of avenging her death with the help of his fellow soldiers. For they, too, have daughters, sisters, and wives. Raping his daughter wouldn't have quenched Appius Claudius' lust. His lawlessness would continue if he knew he could continue to get away with it in the future without any punishment.

This calamity would serve as a warning to the men listening, so that they could avoid similar injustices. As for himself, his wife was deceased, and his daughter, since she wouldn't live any longer in chastity, had met a miserable but honorable death. There was no longer anyone in his home for Appius Claudius' lust: he would defend himself with the same spirit with which he defended his daughter. Others, he said, should take care of themselves and their own children similarly.

As Verginius shouted this, the crowd responded with a promise to support Verginius, pledging that they wouldn't fail to avenge his grief or assert their own freedom. The toga-wearing citizens mixed with the soldiers and shared their own stories of outrageous occurrences in Rome, further fueling the soldiers' anger and a general impression that the decemvirs' power had already been overthrown in Rome. Then others claimed that Appius had been nearly killed and had gone into exile. This caused a call to arms, urging standards to be taken out and a march back to Rome.

The three decemvirs, disturbed both by what they saw and by what they heard had happened in Rome, dispersed in different directions within the camp to calm the disturbances. As long as they spoke in a mildly reproaching manner, they were met with no response. If they tried to speak with authority, the soldiers responded, "We are men and we are armed."

The army marched in formation to Rome and positioned themselves on the Aventine Hill, urging the plebeians, as they fell in with them, to reclaim their freedom and elect plebeian tribunes. No calls for violence were heard.

In response, Spurius Oppius called the Senate together. The Senate decided not to take harsh action, recognizing that the decemvirs were to blame for the rebellion. With the Senate's authority, three former consuls, Spurius Tarpeius, Gaius Julius, and Publius Sulpicius were sent as ambassadors to inquire by whose order the camp had been deserted, what was their intention in occupying the Aventine Hill, armed, as though they had taken their own City in war while enemies still remained outside.

There was no lack of answers. There was a lack of someone to give a response, as there was no clear leader yet or no one was sufficiently daring to offer themselves up. Finally, the multitude shouted that Lucius Valerius and Marcus Horatius should be sent to them: they would give their response to these men.