**3.53** Lucius Valerius and Marcus Horatius were sent as ambassadors to negotiate with the plebeians and resolve their differences. They were also tasked with protecting the decemvirs from the anger and potential violence of the crowd. The plebeians welcomed them into the camp with great rejoicing, recognizing them as champions of liberty both at the start of the disturbance and in its aftermath. Valerius and Horatius were thanked upon their arrival, with Lucius Icilius speaking on behalf of the multitude.

When the negotiations began, the ambassadors again asked what the plebeians wanted. Icilius, who had already formed a council before the arrival of the ambassadors, made it clear that the plebeians were relying more on the justice of their cause than on force. The plebeians wanted the return of the tribunes and the right of appeal, which had been their safeguards before the decemvirs were appointed. They also wanted assurance that no one would be punished for encouraging the soldiers or the plebeians to reclaim their freedom by secession. Their only excessive demand was for the punishment of the decemvirs; the plebeians wanted them handed over and threatened to burn them alive.

To these proposals, the ambassadors replied:

"The demands you have made are so reasonable that they should have been granted voluntarily. You seek assurances of liberty, not permission to attack others. But your anger is more to be forgiven rather than to be indulged, since hatred of cruelty is pushing you into cruelty, and almost before you're free yourselves, you're seeking to dominate your adversaries."

"Will there never be a time when our state will be free from executions inflicted either by the patricians on the Roman plebeians or by the plebeians on the patricians? You need a shield (protection) rather than a sword (aggression). It should be more than sufficient for a common citizen to live enjoying equal rights in the state without causing or suffering harm. Even if you are to become feared one day, when you have regained your magistrates and laws and have the authority to judge us on our lives and fortunes, you'll then decide each case according to its merits. For now, it's enough to recover your liberty."

