**3.54** When the plebeians unanimously gave the ambassadors freedom to act as they saw fit, the ambassadors promised to return quickly once they had settled matters. The ambassadors then departed and explained the plebeians' message to the patricians. The other decemvirs, surprised that there was no talk of any kind of punishment, contrary to their expectations, didn't object to anything.

Appius Claudius, measuring the hatred of others by his own hatred toward them, knew that he and his hard-hearted nature were particularly disliked. He anticipated the hostility toward him, saying, "I know what awaits me. I understand that the fight against us is postponed until we hand over our weapons. The plebeians' anger will demand a sacrifice. So, I'm ready to give up my position as decemvir."

The Senate then passed a decree. The decemvirs were to resign immediately. Quintus Furius, the Pontifex Maximus, was to hold an election for plebeian tribunes. No one was to be punished for the soldiers and plebeians' secession. After these decrees were passed and the Senate was dismissed, the decemvirs formally resigned their positions in front of the assembly, to the great joy of all.

The news was reported back to the plebeians on the Sacred Mount, and whomever remained inside the City escorted the ambassadors back to the camp where they were met by a happy crowd. The restoration of freedom and unity to the state was at hand. The ambassadors then addressed the people:

"Prosperity, favor, and good fortune to you and the Republic! Return to your homes, your household gods, your wives, and your children. And just as you showed discipline in the camp, where no one's land was violated despite your great needs, bring that same discipline with you into the City. Go back to the Aventine Hill, where you started. In that auspicious place, where you first sought freedom, you'll elect plebeian tribunes. The Pontifex Maximus will be there to hold the elections."

The plebeians agreed and were overjoyed. They quickly uprooted their standards and headed for Rome, celebrating with everyone they met. In silence, the people marched under arms through the City until they reached the Aventine Hill. There, the Pontifex Maximus immediately held the election of the plebeian tribunes. They elected Lucius Verginius, Lucius Icilius, and Publius Numitorius, the uncle of Verginia, as their tribunes. They were the ones who organized the secession. Then they elected Gaius Sicinius, the son of the first tribune elected on the Sacred Mount, and Marcus Duillius, who had been a distinguished tribune before the decemvirs were created and always supported the plebeians during the decemvirs' disputes. Marcus Titinius, Marcus Pomponius, Gaius Apronius, Publius Villius, and Gaius Oppius were elected based on hope for their future usefulness rather than past service.

Once the election was over, Lucius Icilius proposed to the plebeians, and the plebeians agreed, that no one should be harmed because of the secession from the decemvirs. Promptly, Marcus Duillius then proposed a measure to elect consuls with the right of appeal. All these measures were passed in an assembly of the plebeians in the Flaminian Meadows, now known as the Circus Flaminius.