**3.56** The power of the tribunes and the freedom of the plebeians were now firmly in place. The tribunes felt it was safe and the right time to bring charges against individuals. The tribunes chose Lucius Verginius to be the first prosecutor and Appius Claudius as the defendant. Verginius set a date for Appius to appear in court. When Appius arrived at the Forum with a group of young patricians, everyone was reminded of his past abuses of power as they saw him and his bodyguards.

Verginius then spoke, "Long speeches are usually used when there is doubt. Therefore, I don't want to waste time talking about Appius' guilt, whose cruelty you yourselves avenged with arms. I also don't want to let Appius defend himself with an impudent defense of his other crimes. Therefore, Appius Claudius, I grant you pardon for all the crimes that you have dared to commit over the past two years, impiously and wickedly. I've decided to focus on one charge against you. Unless you can name a judge to establish your innocence of sentencing a free person to slavery, which is against the law, I shall order you to be taken in chains to prison."

Appius had no hope of getting help from the tribunes or the plebeians. He tried to appeal to the tribunes, but no one listened to him. When he was taken by the bailiff, he shouted, "I appeal." Everyone was shocked to hear this phrase, which is usually used to protect freedom, coming from the man who had recently sentenced a free citizen to slavery. The crowd grew silent.

Then the plebeians started to grumble to themselves saying that there must be gods after all who care about human affairs. Punishment for tyranny and cruelty may come late, but it's never light. How ironic that Appius Claudius appeals for help when he had destroyed our right to appeal! And he's asking for the plebeians' protection when he had trampled the rights of the people! See how he's being taken to prison without any rights, just like he had sentenced a free person to slavery without the right to defend themselves!

Amid the murmurs of the crowd, Appius pleaded for the Roman people to remember his ancestor's service to the state, both at home and in war, and his own unfortunate zeal for the Roman plebeians which caused him to leave the consulship due to the patrician's displeasure, all for the sake of equalizing the laws. He spoke of his own laws, which, while they remain in effect, was leading him to jail. But, when he has a chance to present his case, he will test both his own good and bad deeds. For now, as a Roman citizen, he asked for the right to speak on the appointed day and to appeal to the judgment of the plebeians. He wasn't so afraid of their hatred that he had no hope in the fairness and compassion of his fellow citizens.

But if, without a trial, he was taken to prison without being heard, he would again appeal to the tribunes and warn them not to imitate those they hate. If the tribunes admit that they are bound by the same agreement to withdraw the appeal, they are acting just like the decemvirs whom they had accused of eliminating that very right. Therefore, he would then appeal to the people asking for the protection of the laws that had just been passed this year, by both the consuls and tribunes, which had restored the right to appeal.

What was the point of an appeal if a man, not yet found guilty, whose cause had not yet been heard, couldn't make it? If he, Appius Claudius, can't find protection in the laws, then what protection would a lowly and humble plebeian have in the laws? His case would show whether the new laws promoted tyranny or freedom, and whether the right to appeal and challenge the injustice of the magistrates was just an empty promise or a real right.