**3.57** Lucius Verginius argued that Appius Claudius, as an expert in laws, was the only person who didn't deserve to participate in the laws or in civil or human society.

He urged the plebeians to look at the tribunal, a stronghold of all wrongdoings where that perpetual decemvir abused his power by harming the citizens' properties, bodies, and lives. He threatened everyone with his rods and axes, contemptuous of gods and men, surrounded by executioners, not lictors. Appius then shifted his focus from theft and murder to lust, taking a free-born virgin, innocent in the eyes of the Roman people, snatched from her father's arms, treating her like a war prisoner, and gifting her to a personal attendant who would have delivered her to his own bedchamber. He used a cruel and wicked decree to force the girl's father to harm her. He ordered the girl's betrothed and uncle to be taken to prison when they tried to lift her lifeless body. Then, he was more upset about the interruption to his pleasure than her premature death. Finally, he also had a prison built for his own purposes, which he called the "Home of the Roman Plebeians."

Therefore, Verginius argued, even if Appius invoked his right to appeal again and again, he would act as judge again and again, unless Appius could prove that he had not awarded custody of a free person into slavery. And if he refuses to go before a judge, he should be taken away in chains to prison as someone who has been found guilty.

Appius Claudius was put in prison and, although no one disapproved, the public was greatly affected. The punishment of such a prominent man made the plebeians feel that it was an excessive use of their own freedoms to punish such a powerful man. The tribune set a date for the trial.

Meanwhile, ambassadors from the Hernicians and the Latins came to Rome to congratulate them on the harmony between the patricians and plebeians. They brought a small golden crown to Jupiter Optimus Maximus, on the Capitoline Hill as a gift. They weren't wealthy, so they observed the religious rites more piously than magnificently. The ambassadors also reported that the Aequians and Volscians were preparing for war with the utmost force.

Accordingly, the consuls were ordered to divide the provinces between them. Marcus Horatius got the Sabines, and Lucius Valerius got the Aequians. When the consuls announced a draft for these wars, the plebeians showed so much goodwill that not only the young men but also many veterans, who had already served their time, volunteered. This made the army stronger in both number and quality with the veterans mixed in. Before they left the City, they had the decemviral laws, known as the "Twelve Tables," engraved on bronze and displayed them publicly. Some plebeians say that the aediles did this by order of the tribunes.