**3.55** Then, through an interrex, Lucius Valerius Publicola and Marcus Horatius Turrinus were chosen as consuls. The consuls began their duties immediately. Their leadership was popular among the plebeians, though not by the patricians even though no injustice was inflicted upon them. The patricians felt that any measures taken to protect the freedom of the plebeians reduced their own power.

The first issue was whether patricians were legally obligated to follow rules made by the plebeians' assembly \[a plebiscite\]. Consul Valerius and Consul Horatius proposed a law at the Comitia Centuriata: decisions made in the assembly of the plebeians would apply to everyone. The law gave new weapons to the tribunes, now able to propose motions.

Another consular law was reinstated and strengthened about the right to appeal, the only true safeguard of liberty, which had been overthrown by the decemvirs' power. They not only restored this right but reinforced it with a new law stating that no magistrate could be elected without the right of appeal. If someone did, it was legal to kill them, and this act wouldn't be considered a capital crime.

After strengthening the rights of the plebeians with the right to appeal on one hand and the support of the tribunes on the other, the consuls also protected the tribunes. They revived old ceremonies from long ago to remind plebeians that tribunes were sacred and untouchable, sacrosanct, a memory which was almost forgotten. The consuls made a law stating that tribunes were not only protected by religious sanctions, but by legal penalties, declaring that anyone who harmed a tribune, plebeian aedile, judge or decemvir, his head would be cut off and consecrated to Jupiter Optimus Maximus, his property would be sold, and his family would be sold into slavery at the Temples of Ceres, Liber, or Libera.

According to legal interpreters this law did not make the magistrates themselves sacred and untouchable, but that whomever harms any of them would have his head cut off and consecrated to Jupiter; thus, it's argued that an aedile could be arrested and imprisoned by higher magistrates, which may be illegal as it isn't permissible to harm an aedile under this law. It is, nevertheless, an argument that the aedile doesn't count as being sacred and untouchable. The old law had sworn that the plebeian tribunes, from the moment they were first appointed, were sacred and untouchable.

Some interpreted that, by the same Horatian law, consuls and praetors were also included, as they were elected under the same auspices as the consuls, since the judge was referred to as a consul. This interpretation is refuted, as at that time the consul was not called judge but praetor. These were the consular laws enacted.

The same consuls also decided that the Senate's decrees should be kept with the plebeian aediles in the Temple of Ceres. Before this, the consuls could illegally change or hide these decisions.

Marcus Duillius, now a plebeian tribune, proposed and carried a law that anyone who left the plebeians without representation by the plebeian tribunes or caused a magistrate to be elected without the right to appeal should be whipped and beheaded.

All these changes were made against the wishes of the patricians, but the patricians didn't oppose them because no specific person was targeted.