**3.58** Gaius Claudius, who had left Rome due to his disgust at the actions of the decemvirs and was particularly offended by the tyrannical conduct and arrogance of his nephew, Appius, returned from his ancestral home in Regillum. Despite his old age, he came back to plead for his nephew, whose behavior he had previously avoided. Disguised and dressed in mourning clothes, he walked around the Forum with his family and clients, asking individual citizens for their support. He pleaded with them not to tarnish the Claudian family's reputation by imprisoning one of their own. He implored them to remember that his nephew, a man whose portrait mask would have been honored by future generations, and who was a sponsor of laws and founder of Roman law, is now chained up like a criminal among nocturnal thieves and bandits.

He also asked them to set aside their anger for a moment and to think and reflect on the matter. He asked them to agree to the request of so many Claudii on behalf of this man, and not reject the prayers of many, out of hatred for one. He admitted that he was doing this out of loyalty to his family, and not because he had reconciled with Appius. By courage, they had regained their liberty; by showing mercy, they had the power to establish harmony between the classes. Some plebeians were moved by his devotion to his family, rather than his nephew's plight.

With tears in his eyes, Lucius Verginius begged for pity for his daughter and himself and not listen to the prayers of the Claudian family, which had ruled over the plebeians. He urged them to listen to the pleas of the three plebeian tribunes, Verginia's relatives, close friends who were elected to provide aid to the plebeians but now asked for their loyalty and help. Verginius' tears seemed more just.

Appius Claudius, having lost hope, committed suicide before the appointed day of his trial had arrived.

Soon after, Spurius Oppius, next in unpopularity because he had been in Rome when Appius Claudius made his unjust verdict against Verginia, was arrested by Publius Numitorius. However, Oppius was hated more for his own unjust actions than for not stopping Appius. A witness was brought forward who had served in twenty-seven years of military campaigns and had been decorated eight times for conspicuous bravery. Standing before the people, wearing his decorations, he tore his robe open to show the citizens his back, which was scarred from being lacerated with rods, and challenged Oppius that if he could name one thing he had done wrong to deserve such punishment, he would allow him, without complaint, to vent his anger upon him again. Oppius was also imprisoned and committed suicide before his trial.

The tribunes seized the property of Appius Claudius and Spurius Oppius. Their rest of their decemvir colleagues left their homes and went into exile, and their property was also seized. Marcus Claudius, who had claimed Verginia as his property, was found guilty on the day of his trial. But at Verginius' request, the death penalty was cancelled; he was released and went into exile in Tibur.

And thus, the spirit of Verginia, more fortunate in death than in life, after roaming through so many households in search of vengeance, finally came to rest, with no guilty party left unpunished.