**5.36** The embassy should have been a peaceful one, but it was entrusted to aggressive, quick-tempered ambassadors who acted more like Gauls than like Romans.

After they presented their mission to a council of the Gauls, the Gauls responded that, although the Romans were unfamiliar to them, they believed them to be courageous men since the Clusians sought them out in their time of danger. Since the Romans chose to defend their allies by negotiation instead of arms, the Gauls said they would accept the peaceful terms proposed by the Romans if the Clusians would surrender some of their land, of which the Clusians had more than they could cultivate, to the land-hungry Gauls. If not, peace couldn't be achieved. The Gauls wanted the Romans present when they received the response back. If the land was denied, they would fight it out in front of those same Roman so they could report to Rome how much the Gauls had excelled other mortals in their supreme bravery.

The Romans responded: what right did the Gauls have to demand land from its owners? What right did they have to threaten war against the Romans who were simply seeking answers? And what business did the Gauls even have in Etruscan territory? In response, the Gauls, with defiant pride, claimed that their right was in their weapons and that everything belonged to the brave. With tempers flaring on both sides, they rushed to arm themselves and started to fight.

There, with disaster closing in on Rome, the Roman ambassadors, against the Law of Nations, took up arms against the Gauls. This wasn't done secretly, either, as the three bravest, noblest Roman youths fought before the standards of the Etruscans, their bravery, as outsiders, was impressive. Moreover, Quintus Fabius, one of the ambassadors, riding out of the line on horseback, boldly charged the leader of the Gauls, who was recklessly charging right into the Etruscan standards, and thrust a spear through his side, killing him. The Gauls recognized him while Quintus Fabius was taking the spoils from the body, signaling through their ranks that he was a Roman ambassador.

The Gauls, dropping their anger with the Clusians, sounded the retreat, and instead threatened vengeance against the Romans. Some suggested they should march straight to Rome. The Gaul's elders decided to send ambassadors to Rome first, to complain about the wrongs done to them and to demand that the Fabii, the Roman ambassadors, be handed over to them for breaking the Law of Nations.

The Gauls' ambassadors presented their case demanding justice. The Senate didn't approve of the three Fabii's actions and thought the Gauls' demands were fair. However, their own ambition prevented the Senate from making the right decision. To avoid blame for any misfortune that might occur in a war with the Gauls, they let the people decide on the Gauls' demands. The people, influenced by the power and wealth of the Fabii, and ignoring that there was punishment being demanded, instead elected the Fabii as consular tribunes for the next year. After this happened, as one would expect, the enraged Gauls openly threatened war and returned to their people.

The three Fabii, Quintus, Caeso for the fourth time, and Gnaeus, for the second time, were elected as consular tribunes along with Quintus Sulpicius Longus, Quintus Servilius Fidenas for the fourth time, and Publius Cornelius Maluginensis for the second time.