**5.37** Fortune clouds human judgment when it doesn't want its growing power to be stopped. With such a great calamity looming, the City, which often resorted to the ultimate aid of appointing a dictator against the Fidenae and Veii enemies and other neighboring peoples, didn't seek any extraordinary command or assistance on this occasion. They didn't do this even though they faced an unprecedented and unheard-of enemy from the ocean and the uttermost reaches of the earth. The consular tribunes, who had recklessly instigated the war as ambassadors, were given the main control of the highest affairs. They underestimated the war and conducted the draft with no greater diligence than was usual in ordinary wars, even downplaying the threat of the war.

Meanwhile, the Gauls, upon hearing that the violators of human rights were being honored by election to office and their own embassy was being ignored, were seething with rage, a passion so powerful that their nation was powerless to control it. They immediately raised up their standards and began their march in a column with utmost speed. As they hurried noisily past the cities causing panic, the men rushed to arm themselves and the farmers fled in terror. The Gauls announced with loud shouts that they were heading to Rome. Their column of foot soldiers and horsemen spread out in all directions, far and wide, covering a vast area of land.

The news of their approach was brought by the messengers of the Clusians and then from other states, one after another. It was this tremendous speed of the Gauls that caused great fear in Rome. The Romans hastily assembled an army which was barely able to intercept them at the eleventh milestone, where the Allia River, flowing down in a deep channel from the mountains high above Crustumerium, meets the Tiber River just below the road.

By that time, the entire area was swarming with enemy forces. This nation of Gauls, naturally prone to vain bravado and wild uproars, filled the air with a terrifying sound of fierce songs and shouting, creating a dreadful, chaotic din.