**5.38** The consular tribunes didn't select the ground in advance, didn't set up their camp beforehand, and didn't secure it with a rampart to allow for retreat. They neglected their duties to the gods, let alone for men, not taking auspices or offering sacrifices. Instead, they spread out their troops in a battle line that extended toward the right and left flanks to avoid being surrounded by the enemy's superior numbers. However, their front line was still not equal to that of the enemy, and by spreading their troops thin, they had a weak and scarcely coherent central line. It was decided to place their reserve troops on a small hill on the right. While this decision marked the beginning of the panic and flight, it ended up being their only means of escape.

Brennus, the leader of the Gauls, was suspicious of the strategy used with the small number of enemy troops. He thought that the high ground had been taken to launch a surprise attack on the Gauls' rear and flank while they were engaged with the Roman legions in the center. He turned his standards toward the reserves, confident that if he could dislodge them, victory would be easy on the open plain against a force that was outnumbered. Thus, the Gauls had not only luck but also strategy on their side.

The Roman army didn't act like Romans, either in their commanders or their soldiers. Panic and flight had taken over everyone's minds, and they were so disoriented that more of them fled to Veii, a city of their enemy, even though the Tiber River blocked them, rather than by a direct route to Rome where their spouses and children waited. The reserve troops were protected for a short time by their elevated location. The rest of the line, as soon as shouting from the unknown and unseen enemy was heard by those nearest from the flank and by those furthest from the rear, fled untouched and unharmed, not only without attempting to fight, but without even raising a shout. Those who stayed and fought were not killed in combat. Only those fleeing were killed from behind in the confusion caused by their own men and in the chaos of the crowd that was blocking their escape.

Many Roman soldiers were slaughtered on the banks of the Tiber River, where the entire left wing, having dropped their weapons, tried to escape. Many who couldn't swim or were weak, weighed down by their breastplates and other armor, were swept away by the current. However, most of the Roman survivors made it unharmed to Veii, from where not only was no reinforcement sent, but not even a message of their defeat was sent to Rome. Those on the right wing, who had been positioned farther from the river and closer to the foot of the mountain, all fled to Rome, not even stopping to close the City gates behind them. They took refuge in the Citadel.