**5.52** "When you see such clear examples of the consequences of honoring or ignoring the gods, do you realize, Quirites, the act of disrespect we're about to commit? We're barely recovering from the wreckage of our past guilt and disasters. We live in a City founded with divine guidance and blessings; every corner of it is filled with religious rituals and gods. The dates for annual sacrifices are as clearly marked just as the locations where they are to be performed. Yet, you Quirites plan to abandon all these gods, both public and private. How does your behavior compare to the admirable actions of Gaius Fabius Dorsuo during the recent siege? He bravely descended from the Citadel amid the weapons of the Gauls to perform the solemn rites of the Fabian family on the Quirinal Hill, an act that astonished both Romans and Gauls alike. Should family religious rites continue during war, but our public rites be abandoned in times of peace? Should the pontiffs and flamens be more neglectful of public religious ceremonies than a private individual in the annual rite of his family?"

"Perhaps someone might suggest that we could perform these duties at Veii or send our priests from there to perform them here. But neither of these options is possible without violating the sacred rites. Without reviewing in detail all the rites and all the gods in general, let's look at the feast of Jupiter; can his sacred couch be properly set up anywhere else but the Capitoline Hill? What about the eternal fires of Vesta, and the statue that symbolizes the power of the Roman empire, kept safely guarded in her temple? What about your Ancilia, the sacred shield of Mars Gradivus? And you, too, Father Quirinus? Is it your will that all these sacred objects, some older than the City itself, be left to be desecrated?"

"And see what difference there is between us and our ancestors. They passed down to us certain sacred rites to be performed on the Alba and Lavinium mountains. Was it religiously acceptable for these rites to be transferred to us from the cities of our enemies? Why would we move them to Veii, a city of our enemies? Remember how often we have had to start over and perform sacred rites again because some ceremony was accidentally omitted or skipped. Recently, after the prodigy of the Alban Lake, the state was saved in the war with Veii by repeating the sacred rites and renewing the auspices."

"We have also brought foreign deities to Rome and established new ones. Not long ago, we transferred Juno Regina from Veii to the Aventine Hill and dedicated her with great enthusiasm and attendance of the matrons on a remarkable day of celebration! We have built a temple for Aius Locutius on the Nova Via because of the heavenly voice heard. We have added the Capitoline Games to our other celebrations and, by order of the Senate, founded a new college for that purpose. Why would we have done any of these things if we were planning to abandon Rome along with the Gauls? We stayed willingly through months of siege, were we simply kept there by fear of the enemy?"

"We've been talking about sacred rites and temples. What about the priests themselves? Have you considered the level of disrespect that would be shown toward them? The Vestal Virgins have only one home from which they have never been disturbed, except when the City was captured. It's considered sacrilegious for the Flamen Dialis to spend a single night outside the City. Do you intend to make them priests of Veii instead of Rome? Will the Vestal Virgins abandon you, Vesta? Will the flamen, by living outside the city, incur guilt for himself and the Republic each night?"

"What about all the other things we do. Almost all are done under the auspices within the pomerium. Are we going to forget or neglect them? The assemblies of the Curiate Comitia which deal with military matters, and the assemblies of the Centuriate Comitia, where you elect consuls and consular tribunes, can only be held under auspices in their usual places. Are we going to move them to Veii? Or will the people, for the sake of elections, have to travel, at an inconvenience, to a City deserted by gods and men?"