**5.53** "You say the City is so polluted that it can't be fixed by purification. You say the current situation demands that we abandon our City, which has now been turned into a wilderness by fire and falling buildings, and relocate to Veii, where everything remains intact, so as not to burden the struggling plebeians with the task of rebuilding. However, I believe, Quirites, that you all can see that this is merely an excuse for moving than a real reason. Even before the Gauls arrived, when our public and private buildings were still intact and the City was safe, there was still talk of moving to Veii."

"Consider, tribunes, the difference between my perspective and yours. You believe that even if it wasn't the right decision then, it should definitely be done now. I, on the other hand, and don't be astonished at this until you have heard my reason, believe that if it was a good idea to move when the City was whole, I wouldn't support abandoning these ruins now."

"Back then, our move would have been a victorious one, glorious for us and our descendants. Now, however, such a move would be pitiful and shameful for us, and a victory for the Gauls. For it would seem as though we didn't leave our homeland as victors but lost it due to defeat. The defeat at the Allia River, the capture of the City, the siege of the Capitoline Hill, all these events would seem to have forced us to abandon our homes as exiles, fleeing from a place we failed to defend."

"Did the Gauls manage to destroy Rome, a City that Romans appear incapable of restoring? What if they return with a larger force, which is quite possible, and decide to settle in this City they conquered, and you abandoned? Would you allow it? What if it were not the Gauls, but our old enemies, the Aequi and Volsci, who decide to move to Rome, would you let them become Romans while you become the Veii? Would you not prefer this ruined place of your own than having your City fall into the enemy's hands?"

"I find nothing more disgraceful. Are you so against rebuilding that you're ready to suffer this dishonor? Even if we can't build anything grander than the humble dwelling of our Founder, isn't it better to live in simple huts, among your sacred places and household gods, than to willingly go into public exile?"

"Our ancestors, who were refugees and shepherds, built a new City in a short time amidst forests and swamps. Why are we reluctant to rebuild what has been destroyed by fire, while the Capitoline Hill and the Citadel are safe, and the temples of the gods are still standing? If our private homes had been burned down, wouldn't we individually rebuild them? Why then, would we collectively refuse to do so for the public good when our whole city is in ashes?