**3.34** Both the highest and lowest in society experienced fair and prompt justice from the decemvirs, as if it were delivered by an oracle. The decemvirs then focused on drafting the laws. With great public anticipation, they posted the laws which were inscribed on ten tables and called the people to a special assembly for this purpose.

The decemvirs told everyone to go and read the proposed laws, intended to be good for all, auspicious, and prosperous for the state, the people, and their future generations. Called the Laws of Ten Tables, they had, as far as the talents of ten men could provide, equalized the rights of all, regardless of their social status. The decemvirs felt that the combined intelligence and counsels of many men carry more weight, so they encouraged everyone to think about each law, discuss it amongst themselves, and bring any matter forward that might be added or subtracted for public debate. The goal was to create laws that the Roman people would not only approve by consensus but also feel as if they had proposed it themselves.

Once the laws were adjusted according to public opinion, the Laws of Ten Tables were passed by the Assembly of Centuries. Even in the mass of legislation today, where laws are piled one upon another in a confused heap, the Laws of Ten Tables remain the foundation of all public and private law.

Then a rumor spread that two tables were still needed, and their addition would complete the entire body of Roman law. As the election day approached, this expectation to add the missing two tables led to a desire to appoint the decemvirs again.

The plebeians, who now disliked the title of "consul" as much as they disliked the title of "king", felt they didn't need the help of the tribunes, as the decemvirs allowed appeals from one to another.