**3.37** The plebeians started to observe the faces of the patricians closely. They hoped to gain an understanding about the threat of slavery that had led the Republic to its current state. The influential members of the Senate now despised both the decemvirs as well as the plebeians. They didn't agree with what was going on but believed that the plebeians deserved what they received. The patricians didn't want to help those who, in their rush for freedom, had ended up enslaving themselves. They even piled on more troubles for the plebeians, hoping that their exhaustion with the current situation would make them long for the return of two consuls and the former state of things.

Most of the year had passed, and two more sets of laws had been added to the ten sets from the previous year and there was no longer anything left to do. If these additional laws were also approved in the Centuriate Assembly, there would be no need for the decemvirs to continue.

The patricians were eagerly waiting to see when the elections to appoint consuls would be announced. The plebeians were trying to figure out how to bring back the power of the tribunes, their safeguard of freedom, which had been discontinued for a long time.

As time passed, no mention was made of the elections.

The decemvirs, who had initially presented themselves to the plebeians while surrounded by popular ex-tribunes, now protected themselves by gathering young patricians around them. These bands of young patricians crowded the courts, overpowering the space. They controlled and directed the affairs of the plebeians, since they were backed by the decemvirs. Whatever they desired, they took, as they were the more powerful. By now, even the people's backs were not safe: some were beaten with rods, others were beheaded. And to make sure the cruelty was not without profit; the execution of the property owner was followed by the confiscation of his property.

Corrupted by such rewards, the young patricians not only didn't resist the injustice of the decemvirs but openly stated that they preferred their own unrestrained freedom rather than the liberty of all.