**4.14** The following day, after setting up garrisons at different points, Dictator Cincinnatus went down to the Forum. The plebeians were curious and followed him into the Forum due to the unusual and extraordinary situation. Spurius Maelius and his followers realized that this high authority of the Dictator was directly targeting them. Those who weren't aware of Maelius' plans for royal power kept asking what was happening, what war was coming, and why was Cincinnatus a dictator when he was over eighty years old.

Gaius Servilius, the Master of the Horse, was sent by the Dictator to Maelius. Upon arriving, he said, "The Dictator summons you." Maelius, frightened, asked what he wanted. Servilius explained that he must stand trial before the Senate and answer the accusation brought against him by the prefect of the grain market, Lucius Minucius. Spurius Maelius retreated into his group of supporters.

Initially, when Maelius ducked into the crowd of his followers, he looked around and tried to sneak away but the lictors, under the orders of Servilius, caught him and started dragging him away. At that point, he was rescued by those standing around him and Maelius started running, begging for the protection of the Roman plebeians, claiming that he was being persecuted by a conspiracy of the patricians because he had been kind to the plebeians. He pleaded with them to help him in this critical situation and not let him be killed right in front of them. While he was shouting in this way and the plebeians started to riot, Servilius caught up with him and killed him.

Covered in the blood of the slain man and surrounded by a group of young patricians, Servilius reported back to the Dictator that Maelius, after being summoned, had driven away the guard, had incited the populace to riot, and had been appropriately punished. Then the Dictator said, "By virtue of your strength, Gaius Servilius, you have bravely freed the Republic."