**4.15** Cincinnatus, finding the rioting crowd unsure of what to think of the event, then ordered them to an assembly. There he proclaimed that Spurius Maelius was rightfully executed. Even if he wasn't guilty of seeking a kingship, he had failed to appear before the Dictator when summoned by the Master of the Horse. Cincinnatus had taken his seat ready to review the case, and if Maelius had pleaded his case before him, and if it was a just cause, he would have experienced an outcome his actions merited. However, when he used force to avoid a trial, he was stopped by force.

Neither should they treat him as an ordinary citizen. He was born among a free people, among rights and laws, in a City which he knew that kings had been expelled. And that in the span of a single year, the king's nephews and a consul's children were executed by their own father, the very liberator the City, for plotting to bring back the royal family to Rome.

He knew that Collatinus Tarquinius, a consul, was forced to resign and go into exile due to nothing more than his name's association with King Tarquinius. Spurius Cassius was executed years later for planning to seize power. More recently, the decemvirs were punished with confiscation, exile, and death for their tyrannical rule. And yet, despite all this, Spurius Maelius dared to dream of royal power?

Who was this man?

Although no nobility, no honors, and no merits should lead to a kingship, nevertheless, the Claudii and Cassii, due to their consulships, decemvirates, their own honors and those of their ancestors, and the prestige of their families, had aspired to heights that were a crime.

But Spurius Maelius, a wealthy grain merchant who would have considered a tribuneship of the plebeians something to hope for but not expect, had the audacity to think he could buy his countrymen's freedom by a bribe of two pounds of grain? And by offering food to the plebeians, who had defeated all their neighboring states, he thought he could just trick them into slavery. And this City, which could barely tolerate him as a Senator, wouldn't tolerate him as a king bearing the symbols and authority of Romulus its founder, who was both born from and returned to the gods.

This wasn't considered just a crime, but an abomination. His execution wasn't enough to atone for it. The house and walls where this insane plan was hatched should be razed to the ground. His possessions and wealth, used in an attempt to buy a kingdom should be confiscated. Thus, he ordered the quaestors to sell Maelius' property and transfer the proceeds into the public treasury.