**4.16** With that, Cincinnatus then commanded for Maelius' house to be demolished immediately so that the empty land would serve as a reminder of wicked aspirations that were crushed. That area afterward was named Aequimaelium.

Prefect Minucius was presented with an ox and a gilded statue set up outside the Trigemina Gate, and this was done without opposition from the plebeians. Maelius' grain was then divided up for one aes rude per modius, or approximately ten pounds.

In some historical accounts, it's mentioned that this Minucius had switched his allegiance from the patricians to the plebeians, and that after being co-opted as the eleventh plebeian tribune, he managed to calm a disturbance that had erupted following the death of Maelius. However, it's hard to believe that the patricians would have allowed the number of tribunes to increase from ten, especially in the case of a man who was a patrician. It's also hard to believe that the plebeians did not continue to assert, or at least try to assert, this privilege once it was granted to them. But the law enacted a few years earlier, which stated that it wasn't permissible for the tribunes to co-opt a colleague, strongly contradicts the false inscription on Minucius' statue.

Quintus Caecilius, Quintus Junius, and Sextus Titinius were the only members of the college of tribunes who hadn't been involved in passing the law to bestow honors on Minucius. They did not stop criticizing Prefect Minucius and Gaius Servilius in front of the plebeians and expressing their disapproval of the undeserved death of Spurius Maelius.

They therefore forced through a measure for an election of consular tribunes instead of consuls. They were confident that, as there were six positions now open for election, some plebeians might also be appointed if they promised to seek revenge for the death of Maelius.

Instead, the plebeians, despite being stirred up by various disturbances that year, elected only three consular tribunes. Among them was Lucius Quinctius, son of Cincinnatus, whose unpopular dictatorship was seen as a cause for unrest. Mamercus Aemilius, a man of great dignity, was elected before Quinctius. In the third place, they elected Lucius Julius Iullus.