**2.49** The news quickly spread throughout the entire City. The Fabii family was praised to the heavens for their taking on the responsibility of the state and making the war with Veii their personal battle. If there were two families as strong as the Fabii in the City, they could each take on the Volscians and the Aequians, and all neighboring states could be defeated while the Roman people enjoyed peace.

The next day, the Fabii family prepared for battle and met where they were ordered. Consul Caeso Fabius, dressed in his military cloak, entered the vestibule of his house and saw his entire family ready to march. He joined them in the center and ordered the standards to be carried forward. Never did an army pass through the City smaller in number but greater in reputation and admiration by the people. All three hundred and six soldiers were patricians from the same family. Any one of them would be worthy of command, or could be a Senate in their own right in any era. They marched forward, threatening the Veii with destruction through the power of a single family.

A crowd followed them, made up of their relatives and friends, as well as others who were driven not by hope or fear, but swept up in the emotion of the situation, some stirred by public concern, others stunned by admiration and support. They all admired the Fabii and wished them success, hoping that the Fabii would return with victories that matched their courage with promises of consulships and Triumphs, all rewards and all honors from the Roman people.

As they passed the Capitoline Hill, the Citadel, and other sacred buildings, they prayed to whatever gods their eyes and minds saw that this column would go forth with good fortune and success and that they might quickly return safely to their home and their parents. But these prayers would prove to be in vain. They set out on an ill-fated path, leaving the City through the right portal of the Carmental Gate and arriving at the Cremera River, where they set up a defensive outpost.

Lucius Aemilius and Gaius Servilius were then elected as consuls.

The Fabii were able to protect their garrison and their own territories as long as the situation involved nothing but raids by the Veii. They were also able to keep the entire borderland between Etruscan territory and Roman territory safe for allies and dangerous for enemies as they roamed freely on both sides of the border.

However, this situation changed when the Veientes brought in an Etruscan army and attacked the Fabian outpost at the Cremera River. Then Roman legions, led by Consul Aemilius, arrived and fought the Etruscans in a close, hand-to-hand battle. The Veientes became disorganized and barely had room to organize their line so that during their first panic, while their ranks were entering behind the standards and they were placing their reserves, a wing of the Roman cavalry suddenly charged from the side, not only preventing the battle from beginning, but preventing them from standing their ground, driving them back to Saxa Rubra, named for the red rocks nearby, where they had their camp. There, they begged for peace. However, due to the Veientes' fickle character, they soon changed their mind once the Roman garrison had been withdrawn from the Cremera River.