**3.30** Quintus Minucius Esquilinus and Marcus Horatius Pulvillus were the next consuls.

At the start of their term, there was peace outside of Rome. However, inside the City, the same tribunes and the same Terentillian Law were causing unrest. The situation could have escalated further due to high tensions, but news arrived that Aequians had attacked at night and wiped out the garrison at Corbio. The consuls called a meeting of the Senate and were instructed to quickly draft an army and head to Algidum.

The argument about the Terentillian Law was put aside, but a new disagreement arose about the recruitment of the army. The consuls' authority was nearly overpowered by the tribunes when more alarming news arrived: the Sabine army had invaded. They had pillaged Roman territory and were now headed toward Rome.

This was such shocking news that the tribunes allowed the recruitment to proceed. However, they made a condition. Since they had been frustrated for the past five years trying to pass the Terentillian Law, the existing tribunate provided little protection for the plebeians; therefore, ten tribunes should be elected in the future. The patricians reluctantly agreed to this but insisted that the same tribunes shouldn't be re-elected. An election for the tribunes was held immediately to prevent any further delays after the war. Thirty-six years after the first institution of the tribunate of the plebeians, ten were elected, two from each class, and it was decided that future elections would follow this pattern.

The draft was then held. Once the army was assembled, Minucius set out against the Sabines. However, he found no enemy. Consul Horatius, since the Aequians had killed the garrison at Corbio, and had seized Ortona, fought a battle at Algidum. He killed many enemies and drove them not only from Algidum, but also from Corbio and Ortona. He also destroyed Corbio as punishment for the murder of the Roman garrison.