**3.31** Marcus Valerius Maximus Lactuca and Spurius Verginius Tricostus were elected as the next consuls.

There was peace both internally and abroad. However, they faced a shortage of food due to heavy rainfall damaging the crops.

A law was passed to turn the Aventine Hill into public property. The same plebeian tribunes were re-elected.

Then, the following year, Titus Romilius and Gaius Veturius became consuls.

The tribunes strongly advocated for a Terentillian Law in all their speeches. Privately, they were ashamed that, even though their numbers had been increased, the issue remained as neglected during their own term as it had been throughout the lustrum, or previous five years.

While the City was busy with these matters, they received alarming news from Tusculum reporting that the Aequians had invaded the Tusculan territory. As Tusculum had helped Rome previously, people were ashamed that there would be any delay in providing immediate help. Both consuls were dispatched with an army and found the enemy in their usual position in Algidum. A battle ensued, resulting in the death of over seven thousand enemies. The rest were driven away.

The Roman army obtained a huge amount of spoils, which the consuls sold off due to the treasury's depleted state. This decision was unpopular with the army, and it gave the tribunes a reason to impeach the consuls before the plebeians.

As soon as the consuls left office, they were succeeded by Spurius Tarpeius and Aulus Aternius.

Both prior consuls were immediately impeached upon leaving office. A day for court was set for Titus Romilius by Gaius Claudius Cicero, a plebeian tribune, and for Gaius Veturius by Lucius Alienus, a plebeian aedile. Both were found guilty, to the intense indignation of the patricians. Romilius was fined ten thousand pounds aes rude, and Veturius was fined fifteen thousand pounds aes rude.

The new consuls didn't let the misfortune of their predecessors deter them. They, too, could be condemned, they said, but the plebeians and tribunes still couldn't pass the Terentillian Law. As the enthusiasm for the proposed law died down, having been placed before the people many times and rejected, the tribunes chose to abandon it. Instead, they adopted a softer approach with the patricians, suggesting that they should finally resolve their disputes.

If the patricians were displeased with plebeian laws, the tribunes proposed, they should at least allow equal representation; both the plebeians and the patricians should work together to frame laws beneficial to both parties. The patricians didn't reject this proposal in principle, but they insisted that only patricians should propose laws. As they agreed on most aspects about the law but disagreed on who should propose them, Roman ambassadors were sent to Athens. Spurius Postumius Albus, Aulus Manlius, and Publius Sulpicius Camerinus were ordered to copy the famous laws of Solon and learn about the institutions, customs, and laws of other Greek cities.
