**5.11** This year, Gnaeus Trebonius served as the plebeian tribune. He felt that he was obligated to support the Trebonian Law due to his family name. Shouting loudly, he said that what the patricians had once sought, despite their initial failure, had at last been achieved through the consular tribunes. The Trebonian Law had been undermined. The plebeian tribunes were chosen not by the people's votes but co-opted by the command of the patricians. Patricians or patrician yes-men were now serving as plebeian tribunes. Patricians were using trickery in their efforts to strip away tribunal power, Trebonius said, while his own colleagues were guilty of treachery.

Not only the patricians but also the plebeian tribunes became targets of public anger. This included both those who were co-opted and those who had co-opted them. Three members of the consular tribune college, Publius Curiatius, Marcus Metilius, and Marcus Minucius, fearing for their own safety, turned their attack upon Sergius and Verginius, the consular tribunes of the previous year. They diverted the anger and resentment of the plebeians onto them by formally charging them and setting a trial date. The tactic worked, shifting the plebeians' rage away from them as they spoke to those who were burdened by the draft, the tax, the long military service, and the long distances of war. Those who grieve at the defeat they have suffered at Veii and those whose homes are in mourning for the loss of children, brothers, relatives and friends at Veii, they said, now had the power to avenge their private and public grief on the two guilty parties. All their suffering originated from Sergius and Verginius, who should confess their guilt instead of accusing each other; Verginius blaming Sergius for desertion and Sergius accusing Verginius of betrayal.

Their senseless behavior was so unbelievable that it may have been planned ahead of time as part of a larger conspiracy among the patricians. The former consular tribunes were accused of trying to prolong the war by allowing the Veientes to set fire to their fortifications on purpose, thus betraying the Roman army and handing over the Roman camp to the Faliscans. Everything was done to keep the young soldiers at Veii where they would grow old there, and at preventing the plebeian tribunes from either bringing proposals to the people about the land and other advantages to the plebeians, or conduct well-attended assemblies or resist the conspiracies of the patricians.

A preliminary judgment on the accused had already been passed by the Senate, by the Roman people, and even by their own colleagues. Then, by a Senate decree, the two consular tribunes were removed from their positions, but they resisted resigning their magistracy. They were forced to do so by their colleagues under threat of a dictator. The Roman people then elected new consular tribunes to take office immediately on the first of October, not the thirteenth of December, the usual solemn day, because the Republic couldn't stand having them remain in office any longer.

Despite being condemned by so many decisions, Sergius and Verginius still presented themselves for trial before the people. They felt they had suffered enough punishment, as they had been demoted to private citizens two months early. The pair still didn't understand that their power to cause harm had been taken away, not their punishment. In fact, the power was taken from their colleagues, the other consular tribunes, as well, and they had done nothing wrong.

Let the Roman people, Quirites, remember their feelings when they saw their army fleeing in fear, as they stumbled, wounded and terror-stricken, through the City gates, accusing neither fortune nor any of the gods, but these commanders. They were certain that everyone in the assembly that day despised Lucius Verginius and Manius Sergius, cursing and damning their lives, homes, and fortunes. They argued that it was completely wrong for those whom everyone has called the gods' wrath against to remain unpunished, when it is both allowed and necessary to act against them, yet no one uses their power to do so. They claimed that the gods never punished the guilty directly but armed the injured with the means of revenge.