**5.12** Encouraged by these speeches, the plebeians condemned the accused to a fine of ten thousand pounds aes rude in weight. Sergius futilely blamed Mars and Fortune, common to all in warfare, while Verginius pleaded not to be more unfortunate at home than he was on the battlefield. The plebeians' anger toward them erased the memory of the co-optation of the plebeian tribunes and the fraud against the Trebonian Law.

The victorious plebeian tribunes, wanting the plebeians to immediately benefit from the trial, announced an Agrarian Law and stopped the tax collection, even though there was now a need to pay a large number of troops as multiple military operations were going well but hadn't been brought to a hopeful conclusion.

At Veii, the camp that was lost was regained and strengthened with forts and a garrison, commanded by Manlius Aemilius and Caeso Fabius, consular tribunes. Consular Tribune Marcus Furius in the Faliscan territory and Consular Tribune Gnaeus Cornelius in the Capenate district found no enemies outside the walls. So, they drove off the herds as plunder and devastated the land by burning farmhouses and crops. However, the towns were neither attacked nor besieged. In the Volscian territory, after ravaging the fields, they tried futilely to attack Anxur, which was located on a high hill. They then encircled it with a rampart and a trench under the command of Consular Tribune Valerius Potitus, who had been assigned to fight the Volsci.

Amid these military affairs, internal sedition erupted more violently than the wars. When the plebeian tribunes made it impossible to collect the tax, the generals were sent no money. The soldiers demanded their military wages, and the camp was almost caught up in the contagion of the City's sedition.

In the middle of the plebeians' anger toward the patricians, the plebeian tribunes claimed that it was time to establish freedom and transfer the power of the consular tribune from the likes of the Sergii and Verginii to courageous and energetic plebeian men. However, they could only go as far as electing one plebeian, Publius Licinius Calvus Esquilinus, as a consular tribune to set a precedent. The other elected officials were patricians: Publius Manlius Vulso, Lucius Titinius Pansa Saccus, Publius Maelius Capitolinus, Spurius Furius Medullinus, and Lucius Publius Volscus. The plebeians were surprised at achieving such a significant victory, especially the elected official, who had never held a position of honor before and was simply an elderly, long-serving senator.

It's unclear why Publius Licinius Calvus was the first to be elected to enjoy the new honors. Some believed that his brother, Gnaeus Cornelius Cossus, a consular tribune the previous year who had tripled the cavalry's pay, had influenced his election. Others suggest that he delivered a timely speech that pleased both the patricians and the plebeians about the harmony of the different orders. The plebeian tribunes, elated at their electoral victory, then withdrew their opposition to the tax which had hindered the work of the State. The tax was obediently collected and quickly sent to the army.