**1.26** Before they went their separate ways, Mettius then asked King Tullus for his orders, in accordance with the treaty. Tullus told him to keep the young soldiers armed and ready, as he planned to use them in case a war with Veii broke out.

Both armies returned home. Horatius led the army back to Rome, carrying the spoils of the three dead Curiatii brothers.

His sister, Horatia, who was engaged to one of the dead Curiatii brothers, met him at the Capena gate. She immediately recognized the military cloak of her fiancé on her brother's shoulders, as she had made it. Horatia, in her grief, loosened her hair and tearfully cried out in mourning for her dead lover. The entire spectacle made Horatius become enraged at the extent of his sister's grief during his victory celebration. He drew his sword and immediately struck her down, shouting "Go to your lover, then! You who have no love for your dead brothers or for me, your family, or your City! So should it be for any Roman woman who mourns our enemies!" Despite Horatius' heroics, the murder of his sister in front of them shocked both the senators and the plebeians.

His recent victory shielded him from the immediate punishment of the mob. Nevertheless, he was taken before King Tullus for judgment.

Tullus was unwilling to take responsibility for what would likely be a harsh and unpopular verdict. As an execution might follow, he summoned a council of the people and told them, "I will appoint two duumviri to judge Horatius for treason according to the law." The law was grimly worded. Duumviri would judge the accused of treason. If he was charged by the duumviri as guilty, he can plead his case before the people. If Horatius were still found guilty, his head would be covered with a hood and he would be hanged by a rope from a tree or be beaten to death either inside or outside the pomerium. By this law, the duumviri were created.

The two judges were appointed and, believing the law left them no choice, ruled that even an innocent man could not be absolved under such a law. The judges found him guilty, and one of them pronounced the sentence, "Publius Horatius, we find you guilty of treason. Lictor, bind his hands." The lictor approached and was preparing the noose to be placed around Horatius' neck. Then Horatius, at the instigation of Tullus, who was a lenient interpreter of the law, said, "I appeal." And so, the appeal was taken to the Roman people for a final decision.

The people were deeply moved during the trial, especially when Horatius' father spoke in his defense. He said that his daughter had been justly slain. If it were unjust, he himself, as the father, would have lawfully punished his son. He then prayed that they would not make him, who just a short time ago stood before them as a proud father of a noble son, a father without children. As he spoke, the old man embraced his son, pointing to the spoils of the Curiatii which had been placed in the Forum at the site called the Pila Horatia.

Horatius's father exclaimed, "How can this young man you have just decorated and cheered in victory as he entered the city, be bound under a gallows, tortured, and whipped? Even the Albans could scarcely bear so ugly a spectacle. Go, lictor, and tie up those hands that just won Rome's supremacy with a spear and a shield! Go, put a hood over the man that just liberated you and hang him from that unlucky tree! Whip him within the pomerium walls, amid all of this booty from his fallen foes! Better yet, do it outside the sacred boundaries of our City, next to the tombs where the Curiatii brothers he fought are now buried! Wherever you take him, he will be surrounded by the symbols of his victory that demands he be spared such a disgrace!"

The people were visibly upset by the father's tears. They found it difficult to condemn a man who was ready to accept danger that most wouldn't. They acquitted Horatius, but it wasn't based on the justice of the case. It was out of admiration for his courage.

However, to atone for the murder, the father was ordered to perform a ritual at public expense. He performed sacrifices of reparation handed down in the Horatii family. He then made his son walk under a beam laid across the road with his head covered, as if under a yoke of submission. This beam still exists today and is publicly maintained; they call it "The Sister's Beam." The tomb of Horatia was built with a square stone and was erected where she had been killed.