**1.27** The peace with Alba Longa didn't last long.

The Alban people were extremely unhappy because the fate and fortune of their state had been risked on only three soldiers. The people's unhappiness so affected Mettius Fufetius that evil began to eat away at his weak character. Since he had been unsuccessful in winning back the Albans through legitimate means, he tried to win the Albans' favor back through dishonesty.

Just as he'd once used war to secure peace, he now sought to use peace to provoke war. Fufetius understood that Alba had a stronger desire to fight than the actual resources to fight, so he decided to stir up other nations to go to war with Rome openly and by decree, while he secretly planned to betray Rome under the guise of their alliance.

The people of Fidenae, a Roman colony, were persuaded to revolt after their allies, the Veientes, joined them and they received a secret assurance that the Albans would betray Rome.

When Fidenae openly rebelled, Tullus Mettius called up Fufetius and his army from Alba Longa to march against the enemy. After crossing the Anio River, he set up camp at the junction of the Tiber and Anio rivers.

Between that location and Fidenae, the Veiian army had crossed the Tiber and occupied the right wing near the river, while the Fidenates were on the left near the mountains. Tullus positioned the Roman army opposite the Veientes. Fufetius and the Albans would be opposite the Fidenates.

However, Fufetius, lacking courage and loyalty, was afraid to stay and fight the Fidenates, and was afraid to desert the Romans. Instead, he slowly retreated the Alban army toward the mountains. When he thought they were far enough away, and close enough to the mountains, he brought his whole battle line to an elevated position and slowly prepared for battle. It was a way of buying time for the Albans. They would join whichever side seemed to be winning.

The Romans were shocked when they saw their flanks exposed by the departure of their Alban allies. A cavalryman hurried his horse to inform the King that the Albans were retreating. In this critical situation, Tullus, in a state of alarm, vowed to establish twelve salii priesthoods, a temple to Pallor, the goddess of Fear, and a temple to Pavor, the god of Panic. And then loudly, so the enemy would hear, he ordered them to return to the battle, that there was no need for alarm. He said that he ordered the Alban army to be led around so they could attack the Fidenates from behind.

He also ordered the cavalry to raise their spears. This action prevented a large part of the Roman infantry from seeing the retreating Alban army. Those who had seen the Albans retreating also heard Tullus, so they believed what he said. This made the Romans fight even more fiercely.

Terror seized the enemies. The Fidenates had also heard Tullus yelling and as a great part of them were Roman colonists who understood Latin, they feared being cut off from the town by the Alban armies rushing down from the hills, and so, they fled. Tullus pressed forward, routing the Fidenates' left flank and turning his forces against the Veientes, who were struck with fear at their allies' collapse.

Unable to withstand his attack, the Veientes attempted to flee, but the river behind them hindered their escape. With nowhere to turn, some shamefully threw away their weapons and ran blindly into the river, while others who hesitated on the banks were cut down as they wavered between flight and resistance.

No other Roman battle before this was more brutal.