**5.14** The events of that year concluded as such. The time for the election of consular tribunes was now nearing, causing the patricians to feel a heightened sense of concern, more so than they felt about the ongoing war. They realized that the highest authority was not only being shared with the plebeians but was on the verge of being completely lost to them.

As a result, they arranged for the most distinguished patricians to stand as candidates, men whom they believed the people would be too ashamed to pass over. And as if they themselves were candidates, using every possible strategy to win over not only the men, but also the gods, by pointing out that the elections held over the past two years had been held against divine will. In the first year, there was an intolerable winter that rose like a divine omen. In the following year, there were not just omens, but consequences as the plague brought upon the city and countryside was due to the clear anger of the gods. It had been discovered in the Sibylline Books that the gods needed to be appeased to ward off pestilence. Thus, they argued, it was offensive to the gods that elections held under auspices should see high offices made common, and the distinction between classes blurred.

The plebeians, influenced by the majesty of the candidates and their religious fears, elected all the consular tribunes from among the patricians. Most of these were men had been highly honored in the past; Lucius Valerius Potitus for the fifth time, Marcus Valerius Maximus, Marcus Furius Camillus for the second time, Lucius Furius Medullinus for the third time, Quintus Servilius Fidenas for the second time, and Quintus Sulpicius Camerinus for the second time.

During this tribunate, nothing of great significance was accomplished at Veii. All their efforts were focused on plundering the countryside. Two skilled commanders, Valerius Potitus at Falerii and Furius Camillus at Capena, led massive expeditions that carried off immense spoils, leaving no part of the enemy territory untouched that could be harmed by sword or fire.