**3.62** Consul Horatius' army had already built back a significant amount of courage, but they were angered at the thought that the other army under Consul Valerius would soon return to the City victorious over the Volscians and Aequians, while they, themselves, were being insulted and reviled by the Sabines' contemptuous behavior. When they would be equal to their enemy, if not now?

When Consul Horatius learned the soldiers were feeling this way, he called a meeting. "I assume you have heard about the events in Algidum," he said, "The army behaved as an army of free people should. Thanks to Consul Valerius' wise leadership and the soldiers' bravery, we won. As for me, I'll act upon your feelings with the same great spirit and determination that you have shown me. We can either extend the war, which could be beneficial to us, or end it quickly. If we extend it, I'll ensure that your hopes and courage grow each day through the same training that I began with. If you feel courageous enough and want to resolve this now, let me hear your battle cry. This will show your willingness and bravery."

The soldiers enthusiastically shouted. Horatius acknowledged their decision, promising them that, with favor from the gods, he would act upon their wishes and lead them to the battlefield the next day. The soldiers spent the rest of the day preparing their weapons.

The following day, when the Sabines saw the Roman army lining up for battle, they too, long eager for a fight, also stepped forward. The battle was intense, as is expected between two confident armies. The Romans were inspired by their past victories, while the Sabines rallied from their recent successes.

The Sabines used a stratagem to strengthen their forces. They kept two-thousand men in reserve, outside their ranks, to attack the Romans' left wing during the battle. When the enemy almost surrounded and overpowered the Romans' left wing, a signal from the Romans' horn was heard, and about six hundred Roman cavalry from two legions dismounted from their horses. With their own infantry already retreating, they pressed forward, rushing to the front lines, placing themselves in the path of the enemy. By sharing the danger with the infantry, they made the infantry feel ashamed. Seeing the cavalry getting off their horses to do the infantry's job humiliated the infantry who felt that the infantry wasn't as good as the cavalry even when the cavalry were fighting on the ground.