**3.63** The soldiers returned to the battle that they had abandoned on their side and regained the ground from which they had retreated, In an instant, not only was the fight back on, but one of the Sabine wings was defeated.

The cavalry riders, now protected by the infantry, returned to their horses. They then raced across to the other division to share their victory with their allies. At the same time, the cavalry attacked the enemy, who were terrified due to the defeat of their stronger wing. No one showed more courage in that battle.

Consul Horatius was prepared for all situations; he praised the brave and scolded where the fight seemed to slow down. When scolded, the army immediately showed the strength of brave men; and a sense of shame motivated them as much as praises rallied the others. With a new battle cry and a united effort rushing in from all sides, the Romans pushed the enemy back; the Roman power could no longer be resisted.

The Sabines, chased in all directions through the country, left their possessions behind in their camp as spoils for the Romans. There the Romans recovered not just the allies' belongings, as at Algidum, but their own property, which had been lost due to the plundering of their lands.

For this double victory, achieved in two battles and in two different places, the Senate grudgingly decreed prayers in the name of the consuls for only a single day. In protest, the people went in large numbers to the temples on the second day to offer thanks. This second, unauthorized day of prayer was even more popular and eagerly attended by the people.

The consuls, by prior agreement, came to the City on the same two-day period and summoned the Senate to the Campus Martius where they recounted all their victories performed. This was done while in front of the soldiers. Some prominent senators complained that the Senate being convened among the soldiers was done deliberately, and for no other reason than to intimidate them.

To avoid any basis for such an accusation, the consuls moved the Senate to the Flaminian Meadows, where the Temple of Apollo now stands. At that time, it was called the Apollinare. There, with a large consensus of the senators, the Triumph was denied.

In response, Lucius Icilius, a plebeian tribune, brought a bill before the people to allow the Triumph. Many people came forward to argue against the measure, most of all Gaius Claudius, who loudly shouted that the consuls wished to triumph over the senators, not over their enemies. They were seeking a personal favor from the tribune, he said, in return for the favors they had given him, rather than celebrating a Triumph for honor and bravery.

Never before had a Triumph been voted on by the people. The decision of whether a Triumph was deserved always lay with the Senate. Not even the kings had infringed upon this decision of Rome's highest order, the Senate. The tribunes must not make their power infringe on everything so as to eliminate the existence of a council of state. The state can only be free, and the laws equal if each order maintained its own rights and dignity.

Many speeches were given by the senior senators which echoed the sentiment from Claudius, but all the tribes ultimately approved that proposal of a Triumph. And, for the first time, a Triumph was celebrated by order of the people, without the authority of the Senate.