**3.65** The new plebeian tribunes, when choosing their colleagues, clearly sought to please the patricians. They even co-opted two patricians of consular rank, Spurius Tarpeius and Aulus Aternius.

The newly elected consuls, Spurius Herminius Coritinesanus and Titus Verginius Caelimontanus, didn't strongly favor either the patricians or the plebeians and maintained peace at home and abroad.

A plebeian tribune, Lucius Trebonius, was angry with the patricians claiming that he had been deceived and betrayed by them and by his own colleagues in the co-optation of new tribunes. He proposed a law that whomever had started the voting process for the election of tribunes should continue until all ten tribunes were elected. He spent his time as a tribune harassing the patricians, earning him the cognomen ‘Aspero', meaning "prickly."

The next consuls, Marcus Geganius Macerinus and Gaius Julius Iullus, calmly resolved conflicts between the tribunes and the young patricians without attacking the tribunes' authority and while maintaining the dignity of the senators.

When war was declared against the Volscians and Aequians and a draft was held, they kept the plebeians from sedition by postponing everything, asserting that while there is peace in the city, all would be calm abroad as well, and that civil discord emboldened their foreign enemies.

The concern for peace also supported internal harmony. However, each order, the patricians and the plebeians, was intolerant of the other's attempts at restraint. While the plebeians were being quiet, the young patricians began to mistreat them. When the tribunes tried to help the injured plebeians, they were initially unsuccessful. Later, the tribunes themselves were mistreated especially in the final months of their term, when the influence of powerful alliances grew. This was especially true toward the end of the year when the power of the magistrates weakened. The plebeians began to long for tribunes like Lucius Icilius, feeling that the tribunes of the past two years had been ineffective. The older patricians, while thinking their young men were too aggressive, still they preferred, if limits had to be overstepped, that boldness reside in their own supporters rather than in their opponents.

Thus, moderation in the protection of liberty is difficult, since everyone, under the pretense of seeking equality, elevates themselves at the expense of others, pushing them down; and while taking care not to be feared, they cause others to fear them; and having defended themselves from injury, they inflict injury on others, as if there were no alternative between doing wrong or suffering it.