**1.10** Over time, the abducted women's feelings warmed up to Roman life, but their parents did not. Dressed in mourning clothes, crying with grief and outrage, they stirred up the local communities who sent ambassadors to seek help from Titus Tatius, the king of the Sabines, who was highly respected. The neighboring states of Caenina, Crustumerium, and Antemnae, who were also affected by the incident, felt that King Tatius and the Sabines weren't acting quickly enough. They joined together and prepared themselves for war.

The people of Caenina, in particular, grew so impatient and angry that they chose to invade Roman territory on their own. Romulus and his army confronted them while they were scattered and causing havoc in the countryside. In a minor battle, he showed them that anger without strength is futile. He scattered and put the army to flight, chasing down and killing those who were fleeing. He then killed their king in battle and stripped him of spoils. Then, having killed their leader, he took their city at the first assault.

Romulus then returned back to Rome with his army, victorious. He was not merely a man of great deeds, he was also one who enjoyed displaying them. As such, he carried the spoils he took from Caenina's slain leader suspended from a specially made tray. Romulus ascended the Capitoline Hill and laid these spoils at the foot of an oak tree sacred to the shepherds. He then consecrated the site for a temple to Jupiter and gave the god a new name, Jupiter Feretrius, saying, "I, King Romulus, give you these royal arms in victory, and I dedicate a temple to you in this place that I have marked out. This temple will hold the spolia opima, spoils that my successors will offer you when they kill the kings or generals of the enemy and strip them." This was the first temple consecrated in Rome.

The gods seemed to approve of this, as the promise made by Romulus was fulfilled only twice in many years and many wars, making the honor of offering spolia opima a rare achievement.