**1.11** As the Romans were busy fighting the Caeninans, the army of the Antemnates, noticing that the Romans were away, saw an opportunity to invade the empty Roman territories. Romulus quickly led a legion against them, catching them off guard while they were scattered in the fields. The Antemnates were defeated at the first battle cry and charge, and their town was captured. While Romulus was celebrating his double victory, his wife Hersilia, weary of the entreaties of the abducted women, pleaded with him to forgive their parents, suggesting that he grant them the right to be Roman citizens, as well. This act of kindness would strengthen his rule through reconciliation. Romulus liked the idea and agreed to her request.

Next, Romulus led his troops against another outraged neighbor, the Crustumini, who were also preparing for war against the Romans. However, their morale was low after the defeat of their own neighbors that they put up less resistance and were captured quickly.

Having captured Antemnae and Crustumerium, Romulus sent Roman settlers to them. More people chose to settle in Crustumerium instead of Antemnae because of its fertile soil. Many people also chose to move from these towns to Rome. Of these, they were mostly the parents and relatives of the abducted women.

The last of these wars was with the Sabines, which was the most challenging. They weren't driven by irrational anger or impatience, nor did they show their intention to wage war. Instead, the Sabines' strategy was craft and deceit. Spurius Tarpeius was in command of the Roman Citadel. Titus Tatius, the Sabine leader, bribed Tarpeius' young virgin daughter with gold to let some of his armed soldiers into the Citadel. The girl had perhaps ventured outside the walls to get water to make a sacrifice. The soldiers then entered and crushed her to death by piling their shields on her. This was either to make it look like the Citadel was captured by force or to set a precedent that no traitors of any kind should ever be trusted. Some say the Sabines wore heavy golden bracelets with precious stones on their left arms and rings set with large jewels. The daughter had made a deal with them for what they had on their left hands. So, instead of the golden gifts, they threw their shields on her. Others say that she specifically asked for their shields as part of the deal, and when it seemed like she was betraying them, they killed her with her own chosen reward.