**1.12** Nevertheless, after taking the Citadel, the Sabines held it through the night. The next day, the Roman army filled the area between the Palatine and Capitoline hills. The Sabines didn't engage the Romans or even come down from the Citadel until the Romans, eager to reclaim their Citadel, moved to attack them. Two opposing generals, Mettius Curtius for the Sabines and Hostius Hostilius for the Romans, led the fight.

Hostilius bravely fought with courage and audacity on the front lines for the Romans, even on difficult terrain. He was killed, though, and the Roman line broke and was driven back in defeat to the old gate of the Palatine Hill. Romulus, himself, was caught up in the fleeing crowd. In desperation, he raised his arms to the sky praying, " Jupiter, I have laid the first foundations of the City here on the Palatine Hill by your command to the birds. The Sabines have already taken the Citadel by treachery; from there, armed, they are advancing toward us across the valley. But you, father of gods and men, drive the enemy back from here and put an end to the Romans' terror and their shameful flight! Here I dedicate to you a temple to Jupiter Stator, which may be a monument to posterity that the City was saved by your present help." After praying, Romulus sensed that the prayers had been heard and shouted to his troops, "Romans! Jupiter Optimus Maximus commands the Romans to stand firm and to renew the battle!". The Romans obeyed as if they had heard the command from Jupiter himself. Romulus then joined the front lines.

Meanwhile, Mettius Curtius, the Sabine leader, had led his troops down from the Citadel and continued to push the Romans back. He was close to the gate of the Palatine Hill, shouting, "We have defeated these treacherous hosts, these cowardly enemies! Now they know that to carry off young virgins is a very different thing than fighting with men!" While he was celebrating and boasting about this, Romulus ambushed him with a group of the bravest young men. Mettius Curtius happened to be fighting on horseback when this happened, making it easier to drive him off, and as he retreated, the renewed confidence of the Roman soldiers inspired the rest of the army to rout the Sabines. Mettius, in his panicked retreat, rode into the swamp, and his horse became spooked by the sudden ambush. He lost control as the chaos and noise of the oncoming Romans overwhelmed the animal, launching Curtius off his horse and into the swamp. The Sabines became distracted, fearing the loss of their leader. However, with encouraging shouts and gestures of his troops, and with renewed courage from the support of many, Curtius managed to escape.

Meanwhile, the Romans and the Sabines renewed the battle in the valley between the two hills, but the Romans were ultimately stronger and had the upper hand.