**1.15** A kind of war fever struck the people of Veii who were enraged by the war at Fidenae. They felt a kinship with the Fidenates, as they were both Etruscan. They feared that their close proximity might stimulate the Romans to regard Veii and all their neighbors as enemies. So, they decided to attack the Roman territories. However, their attack was more of a raid than a proper full-scale war. They didn't set up a camp or wait for the Roman army to arrive. Instead, they quickly returned to Veii with the spoils they had gathered from the Roman lands.

When the Romans arrived, they found the Veientes were no longer on Roman soil. So, the Roman army, ready for a serious battle, crossed the Tiber River to go toward Veii. When the Veientes heard that the Romans were setting up camp and planning to march towards their city, they decided to meet them in open battle rather than be trapped and forced to defend themselves from within their city walls.

King Romulus won the battle out in the field, not through any clever stratagem, but simply due to the strength of his experienced army. The Romans drove the Veientes back to their city walls, but Romulus didn't try to take the city of Veii, which was fortified by strong walls and by its very location. Instead, returning home, he ravaged the Veiian lands purely out of revenge rather than for booty.

The Veientes, humbled by their defeat and the destruction of their lands, sent representatives to Rome to ask for peace. The Romans agreed to a truce of one hundred years, but only after taking some of the Veientes' land as a penalty.

These are the main events that happened during the reign of Romulus, both in times of peace and war. None of these events contradict the belief that Romulus was of divine origin or the divine immortality he was credited with after his death especially when considering his courage to reclaim his grandfather's kingdom, his plan to build a city, and his strategy to strengthen it through both war and peace.

Under Romulus's leadership, the City became so strong that it enjoyed forty years of peace after his reign. The people loved him more than the senators, but the soldiers loved him the most. He always kept three hundred armed soldiers as his personal guards, not only in war, but also in peace, and called them Celeres, "the Swift."