**1.4** In my view, the birth of such a grand City and the rise of an Empire, second only to the gods, was the work of Fate.

Rhea Silvia, now a Vestal Virgin, was raped. She became a mother to twins, and, because the twins had an uncertain origin, she claimed that Mars, the god of war, was their father. This may be because she truly believed it or perhaps because it was less heinous to say that a god was responsible. However, neither gods nor men saved her or her children from King Amulius' unending cruelty. She was shackled in chains and thrown into prison; the twins were ordered to be thrown into the river where the current was strongest.

By some divine chance, the Tiber had overflowed its banks at that time, making the regular riverbed inaccessible. The people carrying out Amulius' orders abandoned the twins in these calm, shallow waters because they knew the current would return, however weak. This all happened in the area where the Ficus Ruminalis fig tree still stands today, once called the Romularis.

The area was a vast wilderness back then. The legend continues that when the waters of the Tiber receded, it left the basket with the babies on dry land. A thirsty she-wolf was attracted to the babies' cries and came from the nearby mountains. She was very gentle with them, lowering her teats for them to nurse, that a shepherd of the king named Faustulus found her licking the babies to clean them. Faustulus took the babies home to be cared for by his wife, Laurentia. Some sources believe Laurentia was actually called Lupa, a term for a prostitute among the shepherds but which also meant "she-wolf." This might have led to the wolf story.

The boys, Romulus and Remus were raised in the countryside under the care of Faustulus and Laurentia. After finishing their chores, the boys were especially happy to roam and hunt in the forest. Having so much independence, they became known as strong and courageous among their friends. They didn't just fight wild animals but also attacked thieves, sharing the thieves' stolen loot with the shepherds. The twins enjoyed working and playing together and the group of young men following them grew daily.