**1.5** People say that the Lupercalia Festival, as it's celebrated now, was held on Palatine Hill even back then. This hill was originally named Palatium after Palanteum, a city of the same name. It's said that the Lupercalia Festival originated with Evander, a man from Arcadia who had lived in that area for many years and started a feast there. This feast he brought from Arcadia involved young men running around naked and honoring Pan Lycaeus, whom the Romans later named Inuus.

One year, during the festival, Romulus and Remus were ambushed by the thieves, in revenge for stealing their plunder. Romulus successfully defended himself, but Remus was captured. The thieves handed Remus over to the wicked King Amulius, boldly accusing Remus of the thieves' own crimes. The main charge was that Romulus and Remus had gathered other young men together and raided Numitor's lands, wantonly taking goods from the lands just like soldiers carry off spoils in war. As a result, Remus was handed over to Numitor to be put to death.

From the beginning, Faustulus, who was raising the boys, suspected they were of royal blood. He knew that King Amulius had ordered children to be abandoned and that the timing matched when he found the boys. But he didn't want to reveal this until the right time or if it became necessary. Out of fear that something bad might happen to Remus, he told Romulus his true identity. He told him about the crimes and suffering that King Amulius had caused to him, his brother, and his family.

Upon hearing this, Romulus vowed to avenge all of them.

Meanwhile, Numitor had Remus in custody. By accident, Numitor had heard the brothers were twins. When comparing their age, their outspoken, non-servile demeanor, and his own memories of the grandchildren he once knew, it struck Numitor that Romulus and Remus may actually be his own grandchildren.

The brothers were then reunited and vowed to overthrow Amulius. Romulus asked for the shepherds to come to the palace at a certain time. They were to use different routes not to raise suspicion. Remus, using the resources available at Numitor's house, rounded up a second group of men. When the men were all assembled, they set out. Forcing their way through the palace to Amulius, they finally encountered the king and, with their small army of shepherds, struck him down.