**1.7** Romulus and Remus chose different hills from which they would make their observations about these birds. This would settle who would name and lead the new city. The first augury, or omen, came to Remus who saw six vultures from the Aventine Hill. And when the first augury had been announced, Romulus then saw twelve birds from the Palatine Hill. Each man claimed to be king based on their sightings; Remus because he saw the birds first, and Romulus because he saw more. The twins had men on both sides, claiming each brother was king because of his signs, but both couldn't be king. A fight broke out between the two sides clamoring for power, and Remus was killed.

The more common story is that Remus jumped over Romulus' new wall to make fun of him. Romulus lost his temper, striking him down and crying out, "So shall it be from now on with anyone else who leaps over my walls!" Romulus then became the sole ruler.

He named the new city after himself: Rome.

King Romulus' first order of business was to fortify the Palatine Hill, where he grew up. For religious rituals, he followed the city rites of Alba Longa for most gods. For Hercules, Romulus followed the Grecian rite, as instituted by the king from the area named Evander.

As the legend has it, after Hercules had slayed Geryon, he took Geryon's magnificent cattle as a prize. He was driving these cattle through the area when he stopped for the night. After filling himself with food and drink, Hercules laid down by the banks of the Tiber and allowed the animals to graze while he slept.

A local shepherd in the area named Cacus was enamored with such beautiful animals. He decided he wanted to steal the most beautiful cattle for himself without Hercules noticing. He came up with the idea to drag the cattle, each one remarkable in appearance, into a cave backwards by their tails, so that their hoofprints pointed outward.

The next morning, when Hercules awoke, he noticed that some cattle were missing. He went to check the entrance to the cave. However, he saw the footprints leading out of the cave to nowhere, and this made him confused and uneasy. So, he began to move the cattle away from the area when he noticed that his heifers started to moo because they missed the males, as cows tend to do. The bulls heard the heifers and bellowed back from within the cave.

Hercules stopped. He walked back toward the cave, intently. When Cacus tried to forcefully stop him from entering the cave, calling for help from the other shepherds, Hercules struck him down with his club, killing him.

It was during this time when Evander, a refugee from Peloponnesus, ruled the area more by personal relationships than actual power. He was respected for his knowledge of writing, an art not commonly seen anywhere in the area, and he was even more revered for the divine reputation of his mother, Carmenta, who was also considered a prophetess. The local peoples had admired her powers of prophecy even before the arrival of the Sibyl in Italy. Evander came to investigate the crowd of frightened shepherds that had formed around Hercules, having caught him in the act of murder.

After listening to Hercules' side of the story and observing the impressive size and dignified presence of the man before him, he asked him what his name was, who his parents were, and where he was born. It was at that time that Evander understood clearly that he wasn't just talking with another mortal man. He immediately became excited and welcomed Hercules warmly saying, " Hail, Hercules, son of Jupiter! My mother, an infallible interpreter of the gods, foretold that you would increase the number of the celestial beings, and that here an altar would be dedicated to you, which one day the most powerful nation on earth would call the greatest and honor with your own rites.". Hercules extended his right hand, accepting the omen, and vowed to fulfill his destiny. He then built, consecrated and dedicated the altar.

The very first sacrifice to Hercules was made here, from one of Hercules' quality heifers. Evander invited the Potitii and Pinarii families, the two principal families of the time, to assist in the ceremony and the feast. The Potitii arrived on time and ate the entrails of the sacrifice. The Pinarii arrived late, after the entrails had been consumed, and only ate from the rest of the feast. From then on, there was a tradition in Rome that no Pinarii could eat the entrails of the sacrificial animals, which lasted as long as the family did. For many generations, the Potitii family, instructed by Evander, served as priests for this sacred rite until they passed their priestly duties to public slaves. As a result, the entire lineage of the Potitii ended.

This was the only foreign religious practice that Romulus adopted. He believed in his own immortality that he had earned through his virtue and to which his fate was leading him.