**1.8** After performing religious duties and calling the multitude to a council, King Romulus realized that the only way to unite the new Romans together was through a set of common laws and customs. He created a code of laws, believing that a group of uncivilized, rustic people would respect his authority and be awed if he always presented himself using symbols of the government.

He made himself look more majestic by changing his overall appearance, though most notably by having twelve lictors \[bodyguards\] with him at all times. Some believe he chose twelve because that was the number of birds which had predicted his reign on Palatine Hill. I agree with those who think that the number and type of officers were more likely borrowed from the Etruscans, along with the traditions he borrowed of having a special chair for royalty, the curule chair, and the purple-edged toga, known as the praetexta. The Etruscans had twelve lictors because their king was chosen from twelve states, each providing one lictor.

As the City grew, land was set aside for buildings and plans were made for future growth beyond the current population. So that the city's great size would not be in vain, and to increase its population, Romulus followed an ancient practice of city founders who would gather an obscure and humble crowd around them and falsely claim that they were the children born from the earth, or native-born. He opened a sanctuary for them – a place that today is now fenced off, between two groves. There, a large crowd from nearby states, both free and enslaved, took refuge, eagerly seeking a new life. It was a first step toward the city's growing might.

Satisfied with his own strength, Romulus then focused on how to organize it. He appointed one hundred senators, either because he thought that was enough or because there were only one hundred men who were the elder heads of the founding families. They were called patres \[fathers\] out of respect, and their descendants were called patricians.