**10.30** During this same time, Gnaeus Fulvius, the propraetor, achieved significant success with the Etruscans. He caused significant damage to the enemy by ravaging their lands. He also fought a battle with remarkable success against the Perusini and Clusini resulting in the death of over three thousand enemy soldiers. He also captured twenty military standards. Meanwhile, a retreating force of Samnites attempted to escape through Peligni territory and were attacked from all sides by the Pelignians. Out of five thousand Samnites, one thousand were killed. 

The Battle of Sentinum was a famous victory, but some accounts have exaggerated the scale of the battle. These accounts claim that the enemy army consisted of six hundred thousand infantry, forty-six thousand cavalry, and one thousand chariots. They also claimed that it included the Etruscans and Umbrians. To inflate the size of the Roman forces, they added another general, Lucius Volumnius, proconsul, and his army to the legions of the consuls. However, most annals attribute the victory solely to the two consuls. Meanwhile, Volumnius was in Samnium where he forced the Samnite army to retreat to Mount Tifernus and, undeterred by the challenging terrain, he defeated and scattered them. 

Quintus Fabius, after leaving Decius's army in the garrison in the Etruscan territory and leading his own legions back to the City, celebrated a Triumph over the Gauls, Etruscans, and Samnites. His soldiers followed him in Triumph, celebrating his victory with the usual crude military songs no less than they celebrated the glorious death of Publius Decius. The memory of Decius' father was also honored by such praises of his son, as his son had now matched the fame of his father through his service to Rome.

From the spoils of war, each soldier received two portions of eighty aes rude each, along with a military cloak and a tunic. These were considered substantial rewards for service during that era.