**4.1** Marcus Genucius and Gaius Curtius were next elected as consuls. The year was marked by unrest both at home and abroad.

At the start of the year, Gaius Canuleius, a plebeian tribune, proposed a bill allowing intermarriage of patricians and plebeians. The patricians believed that this would taint their lineage and blur the lines of their birthright privileges. Then the tribunes subtly introduced the idea that it should be permissible for one of the consuls to be elected from the plebeians. This idea evolved to the point where nine plebeian tribunes joined together to propose a bill, that the plebeians should have the power of electing the consuls, either from the plebeians or the patricians, as they wished. The patricians feared that if this were to happen, the highest authority wouldn't just be shared with the lowest but would completely transfer supreme power from the patricians to the plebeians.

Thus, the patricians were actually happy to hear that the people of Ardea had seceded due to the unfair seizure of their land, that the Veientes had ravaged the borders of the Roman territory, and that the Volscians and Aequians were angry over the fortification of Verrugo. The patricians preferred a failing war over a disgraceful peace. These reports were exaggerated by the patricians so that, amidst the noise of multiple wars, the tribunes' proceedings could be put on hold. The consuls ordered that the draft be held, war preparations made, and arms gathered with the utmost vigor, more diligently, if possible, than had been done under the consulship of Titus Quinctius.

Then Gaius Canuleius, while shouting a brief and angry speech in the Senate, declared that the consuls' attempts to frighten the plebeians from pursuing the new laws were futile. As long as he lived, they would never hold a draft before the plebeians had first approved the bills proposed by him and his colleagues. He immediately called the plebeians to an assembly.