**4.2** Both Consul Genucius and Consul Curtius incited the Senate against the plebeian tribunes, while Canuleius simultaneously incited the plebeians against the consuls.

The plebeian tribunes' madness could no longer be tolerated, the consuls declared. It had now reached a critical point where more conflicts were being stirred up at home than abroad. Yet the state of things was just as much the fault of the senators as it was the plebeians. The consuls were just as guilty as the tribunes.

\[They argued before the Senate:\]

"When a reward is given by the State, that quality thrives and becomes stronger among the people. It encourages men to become good citizens in times of peace and good soldiers in times of war. In Rome, however, the highest reward has been reserved for political sedition. The people thus have always found honor in sedition.

Patricians should remember the majesty of the Senate they had received from their ancestors, and consider what condition it's in as they're about to pass it to their own children. And, like the plebeians, they can proudly say that they have grown in their status and influence. Therefore, there will be no end to this, nor will there be in the future as long as seditions are successful, and the authors of sedition are rewarded.

Consider the significant plans that Tribune Canuleius has proposed! He wants to cause a mix-up of family ranks, and a disruption of both public and private auspices so that nothing will remain pure or uncontaminated. With all distinctions abolished, no one would know their own identity or their family's identity. What other purpose do these indiscriminate intermarriages serve, except to allow plebeians and patricians to mate like wild animals, so that each child would be unsure of their lineage or their religious traditions? Would they now belong half to the patricians, half to the plebeians, and not even be allowed a sense of harmony with themselves?

It seems not enough that gods and humans should be confused; plebeian agitators are now preparing the plebeians to seize the consulship. At first, plebeian tribunes casually talked about the idea of appointing a consul from the plebeians. Then, a proposal was put forward that the plebeians may appoint the consuls, either from the patricians or from the plebeians, as they wished. Plebeians would undoubtedly appoint the most seditious individuals! Therefore, the Canuleii and the Icilii, plebeian families, would now be consuls?

The Senate should pray that Jupiter Optimus Maximus won't allow the command of imperial majesty to descend to this level, and that they should rather die a thousand deaths than suffer so much disgrace. Their ancestors couldn't have foreseen that, by granting everything the plebeians wanted, the plebeians still wouldn't be lenient towards them. Plebeians would never be satisfied after achieving their first demand. They would become even more defiant in making increasingly unreasonable demands. No, their ancestors would have rather faced any struggle than have allowed such laws to be imposed on them. Because once the patricians had given in to the plebeians regarding tribunes the first time, they would be forced to give in a second time. Then, there could be no end. The patricians and the plebeian tribunes wouldn't be able to coexist in the same state; either the class of patricians or the magistracy of tribunes would need to be abolished. It would be better to put a stop to these outrageous and reckless demands sooner rather than later.

Is it right that the tribunes, by causing disagreement, stirred up neighboring states against us without any consequences? Now, they prevent us from arming and defending ourselves against the very problems that they, themselves, caused! After the tribunes have practically invited the enemy to come, Canuleius has the audacity to declare openly in the Senate that he would prevent the draft from being held unless the patricians allow his laws to be enacted, as proposed by himself, as if he were a conqueror.

What else is this but Canuleius threatening to betray his City? Allowing it to be attacked and captured? What courage would his words inspire? Not to the Roman plebeians, but to the Volscians, Aequians, and the Veientes! Would our enemies not presume that, under the leadership of Canuleius, they would be able to scale the Capitol and the Citadel?

Unless the tribunes, after stripping the Senate of its rights and its authority, also deprived it of its courage and dignity, the consuls would rather fight against criminal citizens than against armed enemies."