**4.5** Canuleius continued, "In simple terms, does the ultimate power belong to the Roman people, or does it belong to you, the consuls? Did the expulsion of kings result in supreme power for the consuls or equal freedom for everyone? It's right for the Roman people to be allowed to pass a law, if they wish. Or as soon as a bill is announced, will you consuls impose a military draft as a form of punishment? And as soon as I, as tribune, start to call the tribes to cast their votes, will you immediately, as consuls, make the young men swear the military oath of loyalty \[sacramentum\] and lead them out into the camp while threatening the plebeians and threatening their tribune?"

"You consuls have twice experienced how ineffective those threats were against the united will of the plebeians. Surely, it was because you wanted to 'act in our best interests' that you refrained from using force. Or was it the stronger group, the plebeians, who were the ones more restrained? There will be no conflict now, Quirites. They'll test your resolve, but they won't see if you're bluffing and try to test your strength."

"Therefore, consuls, the plebeians are ready to accompany you to these wars, whether they're real ones or fake ones, if you reinstate the right of intermarriage and finally make this state a united one so that they can merge, unite and blend with you through family ties. The hope to attain the highest office should be granted to brave and capable men. It should be possible for plebeians to be a part of the Republic and share in its rule. And, because of equal freedom, the annual selection of magistrates should be open to all. Citizens shouldn't only be able to obey but they should also be able to govern, and they should be able to take turns rotating between both."

"If anyone obstructs these measures and then talks about wars, exaggerating them, be prepared for the consequences. No one will enlist. No one will bear arms. No one will fight for arrogant tyrants who will neither share their public offices nor allow people the right to marry whomever they want."