**4.6** When both consuls stepped into the assembly, the situation escalated from perpetual orations to a heated debate. When the tribune asked why a plebeian could not become a consul, Consul Curtius answered, "Because no plebeian could take the auspices, and for this reason the decemvirs had prohibited the intermarriage in case the auspices would be disturbed by the uncertainty of the lineage of the person taking them." This answer, while perhaps truthful, wasn't helpful. The plebeians erupted with indignation. How could anyone have the audacity to tell them they were despised by the immortal gods and not worthy of taking auspices!

And there was no end to the arguing, since the plebeians had found a most ardent advocate, Tribune Canuleius, and matched his stubbornness. The patricians, now overwhelmed, finally agreed to pass the law about intermarriage which they called "Lex Canuleia." They hoped this would make the tribunes drop or delay discussion about plebeian consuls until after the war. They had also hoped that the plebeians, now satisfied with the new intermarriage law, would be willing to enlist for the war.

Having seen Canuleius win the favor of the plebeians and prevail over the patricians, the other plebeian tribunes, inflamed by his success, worked tirelessly to fight for their own bills. As news of the war grew day by day, they continued to block the draft. The consuls now found themselves unable to get anything done through the Senate due to the tribunes using their veto power. Instead, they held meetings with influential patricians at their homes. It was clear they would have to concede victory to either their enemies or their fellow citizens.

Lucius Valerius and Marcus Horatius were the only men of consular rank who did not attend these meetings. Gaius Claudius suggested arming the consuls against the tribunes. The Quinctii, both Cincinnatus and Capitolinus, were against bloodshed or harming the tribunes, whom they had agreed were sacred or sacrosanct and under an unbreakable treaty with the plebeians.

These meetings led to a compromise decision. Consuls would still be patrician-only, but there would be military tribunes with consular power to be elected from both patricians and plebeians. The tribunes and the plebeians were satisfied with this, and an assembly was called to elect three military tribunes with consular power, or 'consular tribunes.'

Once this was announced, immediately anyone who had ever said or done anything seditiously, especially former tribunes, began to rush about all over the Forum as candidates, grasping hands while campaigning for the positions. The patricians were initially discouraged from running; first, in despair, they thought their chances of winning was hopeless against the agitation of the plebeians, and second, by their indignation at sharing an office with a plebeian. Finally, however, urged by their leaders, the patricians eventually consented to run for office to avoid appearing to have given up on governing the Republic.

The election results showed that plebeians' attitudes changed when the struggle for freedom and dignity was over, and they could make unbiased decisions. The plebeians elected only patricians to be the new consular tribunes, satisfied that they, as plebeians, had been considered for the office. Where today could you find, even in one man, such moderation, fairness, and dignity as was then displayed by all the people?