**9.24** The Romans then returned to Sora, where the new consuls, Marcus Poetelius Libo and Gaius Sulpicius Longus, for the third time, took command from Dictator Fabius. They discharged a significant portion of the veteran soldiers, replacing them with new cohorts as reinforcements.

Due to the Sora's difficult terrain, no clear plan of attack could be formulated. Success seemed far off, using either a prolonged siege or a perilous attack.

However, a deserter from Sora snuck out of the town at night and, reaching the Roman sentries, demanded to be taken to the consuls at once. When delivered, he promised to help them take the city. His plan seemed feasible, so he convinced the consuls to move the Roman camp, now close to the city walls, to about six miles away. This would make the city's daytime guards and nighttime sentinels less vigilant in their duties.

On the following night he asked for some cohorts carrying extra arms to hide in the woods near the town. He led ten chosen soldiers through a steep, almost impassable, road into the citadel, where a large number of weapons had been gathered. There were also stones, some naturally occurring and others piled up by the townspeople for defense. He positioned the Romans here and showed them a steep, narrow path from the town to the citadel.

"With this ascent," he said, "even three armed men could hold off a large group from this vantage point. You, though only ten in number, are Roman soldiers, among the bravest of all Romans. Both the terrain and the night will work in your favor, as both magnify fears in the minds of the uncertain. I will spread terror everywhere; you just focus on holding the citadel."

He then ran into the town, shouting, "To arms! Help, citizens! The enemy has taken the citadel! Defend it!" The deserter repeated these cries at the doors of the leading citizens and to those who ran out in fear. His voice caused panic throughout the city. Alarmed city officials, sending scouts to the citadel and hearing reports that the citadel was full of armed men in large numbers, gave up hope of retaking it. Panic swept through the city and the gates were forced open by half-asleep, mostly unarmed people fleeing. The Roman troops entered through one of these gates, alerted by the noise, and began killing the frightened inhabitants as they fled through the streets in fear.

By morning, Sora was already under Roman control. The consuls arrived and accepted the surrender of the survivors whom Fortune had allowed to survive the night's slaughter and flight. They took two hundred and twenty-five of them, identified as the instigators of both the revolt and the massacre of the colonists, back to Rome in chains. The rest were left in Sora, now protected by a Roman garrison. The prisoners were brought to the Forum in Rome and were publicly beaten with rods and beheaded with axes, much to the delight of the plebeians, who had a vested interest in the safety of the colonists sent to various colonies.