**9.31** The consuls divided the provinces between themselves by lot. The Samnites were assigned to Consul Junius, while the new war in Etruscan territory was given to Consul Aemilius.

In Samnium, the Samnites had surrounded the city of Cluviae and by siege had starved the Roman garrison of Cluviae, as they couldn't capture it by force. When the garrison finally surrendered, the Samnites brutally tortured them by whipping them to death.  Enraged by this cruelty, Junius decided that nothing was more important than a siege of Cluviae. On the first day he attacked the walls and captured the town by force, killing all the adult men of military age. 

From there, the victorious troops were led to Bovianum, the capital of the Pentri tribe of Samnites. This city was the wealthiest and most powerful in terms of men and arms. The soldiers, more motivated by the prospect of loot than anger, quickly took control of the town. They were less harsh with the enemy since, instead, they focused on gathering the most loot as possible, an amount which ended up being greater than the spoils from all Samnium combined. All of it was generously distributed to the soldiers. 

When the Romans' military superiority became too much for any army, any camp, or any city, the Samnite leaders began to look for a chance to ambush the Roman army, perhaps when they were distracted by plundering and could be surprised and surrounded. Peasant deserters and prisoners, some arriving by accident and some deliberately sent, all reported to the consul (which was true, in fact) that a large number of cattle had been driven into a remote wooded pasture. These reports persuaded the consul to send the lightly armed legions there to loot.

However, a large Samnite army had dug in there, hidden from the roads. When they saw the Romans enter the forest, they suddenly sprang up with shouts, attacking the unwary soldiers. The surprise caused some confusion among the Romans, but they quickly armed themselves and piled their baggage in the middle. When everyone had freed themselves from their baggage and armed themselves, they began rallying at their standards. Each soldier took his place and the lines of battle formed by themselves, according to the familiar ranks of the traditional military discipline, without any command from anyone.

The Consul rode to the most dangerous part of the battle, leapt from his horse, and called on Jupiter, Mars, and the other gods to witness that he had come there not for his own glory, but to get plunder for his soldiers. The only thing he could be blamed for, he told them, was wanting to enrich his soldiers at the enemy's expense and only the soldiers' bravery could save him from this disgrace. Let them attack the enemy, who had already been defeated in battle, stripped of their camps, stripped of their cities, and were now, as their last hope, using the stealth of an ambush relying on position, not on arms. He reminded them of the citadel of Fregellae, and that of Sora, and many other places where they had overcome difficult terrain.

Energized by these words, the soldiers ignored the difficulties and advanced toward the enemy line above them. There was some struggle while the army climbed the steep slope, but as soon as the first leading standards reached the top and stood on level ground, the enemy was thrown into panic. They dropped their weapons and, unarmed, tried to flee to the same hiding places they had used before. But the difficult terrain, which they had hoped would trap the Romans, now trapped them. As a result, very few escaped.

Twenty thousand men were killed, and the victorious Romans quickly moved to secure the plunder of cattle that the enemy had left behind.