**9.34** But Appius Claudius' weak arguments didn't convince anyone.

"Behold, Quirites," Sempronius said, "This is the descendant of the same Appius Claudius who was elected decemvir for one year, declared himself re-elected as decemvir for a second year and, although a private citizen without being appointed by anyone, held supreme power for a third year, keeping the fasces and the power. He didn't stop with this power-grab until he was overwhelmed by his ill-gotten, ill-conducted and ill-retained foul government."

"This is the same family, Quirites, whose force and injustice drove you to leave your City and take refuge on the Sacred Mount in exile from your homeland. The same family that you had to protect yourselves from by appointing plebeian tribunes. The same family that caused two of your armies to position themselves on the Aventine Hill. The same family that fought against laws to control interest rates and land distribution. The same family that blocked marriages between patricians and plebeians and blocked plebeians from holding curule offices. This family is a bigger threat to your freedom than the Tarquins ever were. Isn't that so, Appius Claudius?"

"It has been a hundred years since Mamercus Aemilius was Dictator. Have none of the many highly respected and capable censors read the Twelve Tables during that time? Did they not know that the most recent order of the people is law? Of course they did, and that is why they followed the Lex Aemilia instead of the old law that first created the censors."

"When two laws contradict each other, the newer one always replaces the older one. Are you saying, Appius, that the people aren't bound by the Lex Aemilia? Or that everyone else is bound by it, but you aren't?"

"The Aemilian Law bound the aggressive censors, Gaius Furius and Marcus Geganius, who showed how much evil this magistrate could do in the Republic. And in, anger at the reduction of their power, they imposed a fine on Mamercus Aemilius, a man foremost of his time in war and in peace who had proposed the law. The law bound all the censors for the next hundred years. It bound Gaius Plautius, your colleague, who was created under the same auspices by the same law. Did the people not give him the same full privileges that they gave to any censor? Or is your case special and unique?"

"If you create someone as king of the sacrifices, will they claim that they were given the same full privileges as any king ever created in Rome? Who, then, would ever be satisfied with a dictatorship of six months? Who would be satisfied with being interrex for five days? Whom would you boldly create as dictator for the purpose of driving the nail or hosting games? How foolish and stupid does Appius think those people are who resigned their dictatorship within twenty days after performing important services, or who resigned their office because of a flaw in their election?"

"Why should I bring up examples from the past? Just within the last ten years, Gaius Maenius, as dictator, conducted investigations so thoroughly that it threatened some powerful men. His enemies then accused him of the very crime he was investigating. Maenius resigned his dictatorship so he could defend himself as a private citizen. I don't expect you to be so moderate, lest you betray your family, the most domineering and arrogant of all families. You won't resign your office a day or even an hour before you are required to, provided you don't exceed the time limit established by law. Is it enough to add either a day or a month to the censorship? Yet Appius says he'll hold the censorship, and hold it alone, three years and six months longer than the Lex Aemilia allows. This is like having the power of a king."

"Or will you fill the vacancy with another colleague, which isn't allowed even when a censor dies? And don't you regret that you, a religious censor, have degraded a most ancient and solemn ceremony, which was instituted by the very god it honors and entrusted to the noblest of priests, by reducing it to the service of mere slaves? You aren't satisfied that a family older than the city itself, which had a relationship with the immortal gods, has been completely wiped out within a year because of you and your censorship?"

"You want to involve the whole state in a terrible crime that I'm horrified to even think about. The city was captured in the lustrum when Lucius Papirius Cursor, after the death of his colleague Gaius Julius, appointed Marcus Cornelius Maluginensis as censor rather than resign his office. But his ambition was much more moderate than yours, Appius! Lucius Papirius didn't hold the censorship alone or beyond the time allowed by law. But still, no one followed his example. All the censors who came after him resigned their office if their colleague died. But neither the law nor shame stops you from ignoring the end of your term, nor the resignation of your colleague. You think courage is pride, boldness, and contempt for gods and men."

"Appius Claudius, out of respect for the dignity and decorum of the office which you have held, I wouldn't want to use violence against you or even speak to you harshly. But your pride and stubbornness have forced me to say what I've said. And now, unless you obey the Lex Aemilia, I'll order you to be taken to prison. And since our ancestors decreed that in censorial elections, unless two candidates each receive the required legal votes, the result is not valid. Elections must be postponed if either one is not elected. I will not allow you, who could not even be elected sole censor, to continue on and hold the censorship alone."

After saying this, he ordered the censor to be arrested and taken to prison. But even though six of the other nine tribunes approved of their colleague's actions, three tribunes protected Appius when he appealed to them.

As such, Appius Claudius held the censorship alone, which upset people of all ranks.