**9.36** In those days, the Ciminian Forest was considered just as impenetrable and terrifying as the German forests have been in more recent times. Up to that day no one, not even traders, ventured to enter it. Few aside from the Consul, himself, had the courage to enter it, as the memory of the disaster at the Caudine Forks still lingered.

Then, of those who were present, Marcus Fabius, the consul's brother (some say his name was Caeso, others Gaius Claudius, said to have had the same mother as the consul), volunteered to survey the area and provide a detailed report.

Marcus Fabius had been educated at Caere, where he had lived with friends, was educated in Etruscan literature, and was fluent in the Etruscan language. It has been suggested that, during those times, Roman youth were often taught Etruscan learning, similar to how they're now taught Greek. However, it's more likely that this individual was exceptional in his daring impersonation and ability to mix with the enemy. It's said that his only companion was a slave who had grown up with him and was therefore also familiar with the language.

They received no instructions upon departure aside from a brief description of the country they were to pass through, along with the names of the leading men in the various states, to prevent them from being discovered due to any hesitation in their conversation.

They left dressed as shepherds, armed with rustic weapons, sickles and two short javelins each. However, their knowledge of the local language, their attire and their weapons didn't hide them as effectively as the unbelievable fact of that a foreigner would dare enter the Ciminian Forest. They reportedly reached as far as the Camertes-Umbri people. There, the Romans admitted their identity and, after being introduced to their senate, negotiated on behalf of the Consul for an alliance and friendship.

After being treated with gracious hospitality, they announced to the Romans that supplies had been ordered to be ready for their army in thirty days, if they entered their lands, and that the young men of the Camertes-Umbri would be ready in arms to follow them in the future. 

When this news was reported to Consul Fabius, he immediately sent the baggage train ahead at the first watch, ordering the legions to follow it. He, himself, stayed behind with the cavalry and, at dawn, rode against the enemy's outposts which were arranged outside the forest. After keeping the enemy occupied there for a sufficient amount of time, he returned to his camp and, leaving through the opposite gate, caught up with the main army by nightfall.

At dawn the next day, he had reached first ridge of the Mount Ciminius. From there, he could see the rich fields of the Etruscan territory and allowed his soldiers to descend upon it.

When a large amount of loot had been taken, some hastily assembled Etruscan militia, gathered by the area's leading residents, confronted the Romans. However, they were so disorganized that they nearly became spoils themselves. After these peasants were killed or driven away, and the land was extensively ravaged, the victorious Romans returned to their camp, rich with spoils.

By chance, five ambassadors and two plebeian tribunes had arrived on behalf of the Senate to instruct Consul Fabius not to try to cross the Ciminian Forest. However, they were relieved to find that they had arrived too late to stop the campaign. Instead, they returned to Rome as messengers of victory.