**9.39** The following day, the Dictator, after fresh auspices were taken, was invested with his official powers. He then took command of the newly formed legions, raised due to the alarm caused by the army crossing the Ciminian Forest, and led them to Longula. Here, the Dictator took command of the veteran troops of Consul Marcius and then led his forces into formation. The enemy appeared ready to fight.

The two armies faced each other, fully armed and in formation. They remained that way until nightfall, with neither side choosing to initiate the conflict. After this, they remained encamped near each other for a significant period, neither doubting their own strength nor underestimating their opponent.

Meanwhile, the Etruscans raised a huge army in accordance with their sacred law where each man is responsible for bringing another to join. As the Etruscan army was now larger than any previously raised, their morale was also the highest it had ever been.

The battle was fought with such ferocity that no missiles were thrown by either side; only swords were used. The intensity of the combatants was further fueled by the prolonged fight, making it seem to the Romans as if they were fighting, not with the Etruscans whom they had defeated many times before, but with a new race. There was no sign of retreat from any side.

The first lines fell. To prevent the standards from being left undefended, the second lines took their place. Eventually, even the men forming the last reserves were called into action. The situation had become so dire that the Roman cavalry dismounted and pushed through piles of weapons and bodies to reach the front lines of the infantry. 

The cavalrymen, appearing like a fresh army among the now exhausted men, disrupted the standards of the Etruscans. Despite their weakened state, the Romans supported their attack and finally broke through the enemy standards.

Etruscan determination then began to wane and some of the Etruscan maniples started to turn away. Once they showed their backs, the rest likewise took flight.

That day broke, for the first time, the power of the Etruscans who had old and abundant resources and had long flourished in prosperity. The best of their men were killed in the battle, and their camp was captured and looted in the same attack.