**9.40** The campaign against the Samnites continued immediately afterward. It was faced with equal danger and an equally glorious conclusion.

The Samnites, in addition to their many preparations for battle, made their army shine with new decorations on their armor. Their troops were divided into two groups, one with shields embossed with gold, the other embossed with silver. The shields were designed to cover the chest and shoulders, with a wide flat top and a wedge-shaped bottom for easy mobility. A sponge covered the chest, and the left leg was protected by a metal shinguard. Their crested helmets were adorned with plumes to make them appear taller.

Soldiers with gold-armored shields wore tunics of various colors, while those with silver-armored shields wore white linen. Those with silver shields had silver scabbards and silver belts. Those with gold shields had gilded scabbards and golden belts; their horses had gilded saddlecloths. These soldiers were assigned to the right wing, while the silver-adorned soldiers were positioned on the left.

The Romans were aware familiar with such displays of ornamental arms. Roman leaders taught them that a soldier should look fearsome, not relying on gold and silver, but on steel and courage. In truth, such decorations were more like spoils of war than armor. They shined before battle but quickly lost all their beauty in the midst of blood and wounds.

A soldier's honor lies in his valor. All those fine ornaments follow after victory. A wealthy enemy is merely the reward to a victorious soldier, however poor.

While the soldiers were energized by these words, the Dictator led them into battle. He positioned himself on the right wing and gave command of the left to the Master of the Horse.

All at once, there was a great rush. The battle between the two armies was fierce, as was the competition between Dictator Cursor and the Master of the Horse to see which wing would achieve victory first.

Master of the Horse Junius, with his left wing, was the first to attack the Samnites' right wing. These Samnite soldiers were consecrated in the Samnite manner to Orcus, the underworld god of broken oaths, and were distinguished by their white clothing and shining white armor. Junius declared that he would sacrifice these to Orcus and brought the standards forward, disrupting their ranks and making a noticeable impact on their line. 

Seeing this, the Dictator exclaimed, "Shall the victory begin on the left wing? Shall the right wing, the Dictator's own troops, follow the lead of another, and not claim the greatest share of the victory?"

This spurred on the soldiers. The cavalry was just as valiant as the infantry, and the legates were as eager as the generals. 

Marcus Valerius for the right wing and Publius Decius for the left wing, both men of consular rank, rode out to the cavalry positioned at either end of the line, and rallied them to join in the pursuit of glory. They then led a charge across the enemy flanks.

When this new danger surrounded the enemy's line on both side, the Roman legions noticed the Samnites' terror and renewed their battle cry, rushing forward and causing the Samnites to start retreating. The plains were soon filled with heaps of slain bodies. their shining armor, and their standards. At first, the terrified Samnites found refuge in their camp, but they didn't hold onto it for long. Before nightfall, it had been captured, looted, and burned.

Dictator Papirius Cursor celebrated a Triumph, as decreed by the Senate. The most impressive sight in his procession was the captured arms. The shields inlaid with gold were so magnificent that they were distributed to the owners of the moneychanger's booths to be used to decorate the Forum. This, it's said, started the tradition of the aediles decorating the Forum during religious processions whenever sacred carriages carrying divine images \[tensae\] moved through it. The Romans used these extraordinary ornate arms to honor the gods.

The Campanians, out of pride and their hatred for the Samnites, dressed their gladiators, who furnished them entertainment at their feasts, in the same manner. They addressed them by the name of Samnite.

During this year, Consul Fabius fought a battle with the remnants of the Etruscans near Perusia, a city that had also broken the truce, and won an easy and decisive victory. He would have captured the city itself, as he marched right up to the walls, if the ambassadors had not come out and surrendered the city. After placing a garrison at Perusia and sending the Etruscan ambassadors to the Roman Senate to request friendship ahead of him, Consul Fabius rode into the City in Triumph, with a victory even more celebrated than that of the Dictator.

In addition, much of the credit for defeating the Samnites was given to the legates, Publius Decius and Marcius Valerius. At the next election, the people unanimously elected Publius Decius as consul and Marcius Valerius as praetor.