**10.36** The Samnites piled their baggage in the center and each soldier, armed for battle, took  their position in the ranks as they formed their line. There was now a small space between the two lines as each stood waiting for the other to give the signal and make the first move. Neither side had any inclination to fight, and they would have gone their separate ways unharmed, but each feared being attacked by the other during retreat. Of its own accord, a sluggish fight began between the unwilling and the hesitant with an uncertain and uneven shout. Not a soul moved from their position.

The Roman consul, hoping to stir things up, sent a few squadrons of cavalry to do a charge out of formation. Many were thrown from their horses. Others became disoriented. It led to a rush as soldiers from both the Samnite and Roman lines rushed forward, the former to attack the fallen and the latter to protect their comrades. The battle became a little more heated, but the Samnites were more aggressive and outnumbered the Romans. 

In the confusion, the panicked Roman cavalry and their frightened horses trampled their own men who had come to help. The ensuing chaos led to a full-scale Roman rout, as their entire line collapsed into flight. The Samnites pressed forward, fighting with the rear of the retreating Romans. 

Consul Atilius, watching this, rode ahead of his men to the camp gate and positioned a group of cavalry there with orders to treat anyone approaching the rampart, Roman or Samnite, as an enemy. He then positioned himself in the path of his retreating men and threatened them:

"Where are you going, soldiers? You'll find men and arms to fight here too. As long as your Consul lives, you won't pass this rampart unless as a victor. Therefore, choose whether you will fight your own countrymen or fight the enemy."

As the Consul spoke, the cavalry surrounded him with their spears pointed outward and ordered the infantry to return to the battle.

The consul's bravery and good fortune helped him, as the Samnites didn't press their advantage. This gave him space to turn the standards and reform their line from facing the camp to facing the enemy. The soldiers began to encourage each other to return to the battle, while the centurions snatched the standards from the standard-bearers and carried them forward, showing their men that the enemy who were approaching were few in number, and were arriving with their ranks disorganized and scattered. 

At the same time, Consul Atilius, raising his hands to the sky and speaking loudly enough to be heard from a distance, promised to build a temple to Jupiter Stator if the Roman army stopped their retreat, returned to the battle, and defeated the Samnites. Everyone, all parts of the army, the officers, the soldiers, the infantry and the cavalry, worked together to restore the battle. It seemed as though the gods were favoring the Romans, as the tide of the battle quickly turned. The enemy was pushed back from the camp and was soon driven back to where the battle had started. 

They were both stopped by the pile of baggage the Samnites had thrown in the middle and they were stuck there. And then, to prevent it from being looted, the Samnites surrounded the baggage with armed men. The Roman infantry pressed on them from the front while the cavalry were driven around and surrounded them from the rear. Trapped between the two, the Samnites were either killed or captured.

Seven thousand eight hundred Samnites were taken prisoner, all of whom were sent naked under the yoke, while four thousand eight hundred were killed. The victory wasn't a happy one for the Romans. When the consul counted the losses they suffered from the two days, the number of soldiers lost was reported to be seven thousand eight hundred soldiers. 

While these things were going on in Apulia, the Samnites joined another together with another army and tried to take Iteramna, a Roman colony on the Latin road, but failed. They ravaged the countryside and took people and cattle as spoils, along with the colonists they had captured. They encountered the victorious Consul Atilius returning from Luceria and not only lost their spoils but were also slaughtered because they were marching in disarray and were heavily burdened. The Consul issued an edict calling the owners to Interamna to reclaim their property and left his army there while he went to Rome to hold the elections. 

The Consul asked for a Triumph but was denied because he had lost so many soldiers and because he had sent the prisoners under the yoke without negotiating any terms.