**10.33** The Consul, stirred by the commotion, ordered two cohorts of the allies, the Lucana and the Suessana, which were closest, to protect the camp headquarters.

He then led the maniples of the legions down the main road of the camp. The soldiers rushed into formation, barely taking time to arm themselves. They identified the enemy more by their shouts than by sight, making it impossible to estimate their numbers. Thus, uncertain of their situation, they initially retreated, allowing the enemy to penetrate deeper into the middle of the camp.

The Consul saw what was happening and shouted at them. Were they going to allow the Samnites to push them out, beyond their own rampart, only for them to need to attack their own camp later? At that point, the soldiers rallied. With a shout, they stood their ground and advanced, pressing forward against the enemy and forcing them to retreat. Even though they still felt the same fear which they had when they started, they quickly drove them out beyond the gate and the rampart. However, they didn't dare chase them any further due to the poor visibility, fearing an ambush.

Satisfied with having cleared the camp, they retreated within the rampart, having killed nearly three hundred of the enemy. Of the Romans, from the first Roman guard-post, and those surprised at the quaestor's quarters, seven hundred and thirty died. 

The Samnites were not only emboldened by this daring act, which hadn't turned out badly, but it boosted their confidence so much that they not only prevented the Romans from advancing into their territory, but also from foraging in their fields. Foraging parties had to retreat to the peaceful territory of Sora.

News of these events, exaggerated beyond the truth, reached Rome, forcing Consul Lucius Postumius, who was barely able to stand, to leave the City for the army. He issued a proclamation for his troops to gather at Sora. Before his departure, however, he dedicated the Temple of Victory, which he had commissioned during his term as a curule aedile using the money from fines that had been collected.

After joining the army, he moved from Sora toward Samnium, to his colleague's camp. The Samnites, losing hope of resisting the two armies, retreated. The consuls then separated, taking different paths to ravage the enemy's lands and besiege their towns.