**10.45** The consuls' letters were received with great rejoicing in both the Senate and the assembly of the people. The public rejoiced with a four-day thanksgiving, and by private celebrations. These victories weren't only significant for the Roman people, but they also came at a crucial time. News arrived that the Etruscans were once again preparing for war. People wondered how they could have faced the power of Etruria if things had gone wrong in Samnium. The Etruscans, emboldened by the Samnites' conspiracy and seeing the consuls and the entire Roman force engaged against them, chose this moment to reignite hostilities.

Ambassadors from the allies, brought to the Senate by praetor Marcus Atilius, reported that their lands were being ravaged by the neighboring Etruscans because they had refused to turn against the Romans. They pleaded with the Senate to protect them from the violence and injury of their shared enemy. The ambassadors were assured that the Senate would ensure the allies didn't regret their loyalty and that the Etruscans would soon be in the same position as the Samnites.

The Etruscan business might have been delayed if it hadn't been for the news that the Faliscans, long-time friends of Rome, had joined forces with the them. The Senate, considering the close proximity of the Faliscans, decided to send fetials to demand restitution. When this was denied, the Senate declared war on the Faliscans, and the consuls were asked to draw lots to decide who would lead an army from Samnium into Etruria.

Meanwhile, Consul Carvilius had already captured Velia, Palumbinum, and Herculaneum from the Samnites. Velia was taken after a few days' siege, Palumbinum was taken on the same day he approached its walls.

At Herculaneum also, with standards joined in a pitched battle, the consul fought without a clear victory and with more losses on his side than the enemy's. However, after setting up his camp, he enclosed the enemy behind the walls and then besieged the city and captured it. In these three cities, about ten thousand men were either captured or killed, so by a very small margin more were captured. When the consuls drew lots for their provinces, the Etruscan territory was assigned to Carvilius, much to the soldiers' relief, who were struggling with the cold in Samnium. 

Consul Papirius faced a larger force of resistance at Saepinum. He had to fight often in pitched battles, often on the march, and often around the city walls against enemy attacks. It was not a siege but a war on equal terms, as the Samnites protected themselves not only with walls, but more with men and arms. At last, after much fighting, he forced them to submit to a regular siege. He then took the city by storm with continuous assaults and by using his siege-engines. The Roman soldiers' fury caused the most casualties during the capture of the town; seven thousand four hundred fell by the sword, and less than three thousand men were taken prisoner. The spoils, which were substantial as the Samnites' wealth was concentrated into a few cities, were given to the soldiers.