**10.40** Consul Papirius shared the details he had learned from Samnite deserters with his soldiers, who were already angry. Filled with confidence from both divine and human support, the soldiers called out in unison to fight. They were confused that the battle was postponed until the next day and hated having to wait a day and a night. 

In the third watch of the night, after receiving a confirmation letter from Carvilius, Papirius got up in silence and then ordered for the pullularii. There was no class of men in the camp untouched by the desire of battle. Everyone in the camp, from the highest to the lowest, were equally intent. The general observed the soldiers' enthusiasm, and they observed his.

This eagerness even spread to those taking the auspices. When the chickens refused to eat, the pullularius lied about the omen. Instead, he told the consul that the corn danced around on the ground as it fell from their greedy beaks. The Consul was pleased and announced that the auspices were excellent; they would act under the guidance of the gods. He then raised the signal for battle.

As battle lines were forming, Consul Papirius received news from a deserter that twenty cohorts of Samnites, each consisting of about four hundred soldiers \[eight thousand men\] had marched toward Cominium. As he wanted his colleague to be aware of this, he instantly sent a messenger, then ordered his own troops to advance more quickly.

Papirius had already assigned reinforcements to their respective positions and appointed prefects to lead them. He gave the command of the right wing to Lucius Volumnius, the left wing to Lucius Scipio, and to the cavalry he appointed other legates, Gaius Caedicius and Titus Trebonius. He ordered Spurius Nautius to remove the saddlebags from the mules and quickly lead them, along with three auxiliary cohorts, to a visible hill. There, during the heat of the battle, he was to raise as much dust as possible.

While the general was making these arrangements, a disagreement arose among the pullularii about the auspices of the day. The dispute was heard by some Roman cavalry who felt that the matter needed to be told to someone. They informed Spurius Papirius, the consul's nephew, about the uncertainty of the auspices. The young man, born in an era when disrespect for the gods wasn't yet known, was naturally inclined to investigate the matter thoroughly so that he might bring forward nothing unverified before reporting it to the consul.

The Consul responded, "I commend your bravery and diligence. However, if the person taking the auspices lied about the results, he brings the predicted misfortune upon himself. But for the Roman people and their army, the favorable auspices reported to me is a good sign." He then ordered the centurions to place the pullularii at the front among the first standards. 

The Samnites also brought forward their standards, followed by their main body, armed and decorated in such a way that they presented a magnificent spectacle to their enemies. 

Before the battle cry was raised or the rush to battle began, the pullularius was hit by a stray javelin and fell in front of the standards. When the Consul Papirius heard this, he said, "The gods are present in the battle. The guilty wretch has received his punishment!" As the Consul spoke these words, a crow cawed loudly in front of him. He was delighted by this omen and declared that the gods had never intervened more clearly in human affairs. He then ordered the horns to be sounded and a battle cry to be shouted.