**10.46** The landscape was now completely blanketed in snow, making it impossible to stay outside. As such, Consul Papirius led his troops back to Rome from Samnium.

Upon his arrival at Rome, a Triumph was unanimously agreed upon for him. He celebrated this Triumph while still in office, with an exceptional level of grandeur for that era. The cavalry and infantry paraded in the procession, adorned with their decorations. Many civic crowns were seen as well as many that had been won by scaling a rampart or a city wall.

The spoils of the Samnites were examined with great interest and compared in terms of splendor and beauty to those captured by the Consul's father, which were frequently displayed as public decorations. Several distinguished prisoners, known for their own achievements and those of their ancestors, were included in the procession.

Twenty-one thousand five hundred aes rude and thirty-three thousand aes rude in heavy brass were carried in the procession. This money was reportedly from the sale of the prisoners. From the cities, one thousand eight hundred and thirty pounds of silver were taken. All the silver and brass were stored in the treasury, with no portion given to the soldiers. This rankled the plebeians, along with the fact that a tax was levied on the soldiers' pay. By eliminating the ostentatious display of transporting the spoils to the treasury, they argued, the soldiers could have been rewarded with a portion of the spoils, and the army's pay could have been sourced from these funds.

Consul Papirius dedicated the Temple of Quirinus, although no ancient historian mentions it as having been vowed in an actual battle, nor could it have been built it in so short a time. However, vowed by Papirius' father when he was dictator, it was dedicated and adorned with military spoils by the son while he was consul. There were so many spoils that they not only decorated that Temple and the Forum, but some were also distributed among the allies and colonies nearby to adorn their temples and public places.

After his Triumph, he led his army into winter quarters in the Vescinian territory, as that region was being troubled by the Samnites.

Meanwhile, in Etruria, Consul Carvilius first attacked Troilum, allowing four hundred and seventy of the wealthiest inhabitants to leave after they paid a large sum of money, but he took the rest of the population and the town by force. He then overpowered five forts situated in well-fortified places, killing two thousand four hundred of the enemy and taking just under two thousand prisoners. He granted a year's truce to the Faliscans, who sought peace, on the condition that they provided a hundred thousand aes rude and that year's pay for his army. After completing this task, he returned home to a Triumph.

Although his defeat of the Samnites was less illustrious than that of his colleague, it was elevated to the same level by ending the war with the Etruscans. He deposited three hundred and eighty thousand aes rude in heavy brass into the treasury. Then, he used the remaining brass from the spoils to contract for the construction of a Temple to Fortis Fortuna, near the temple dedicated to the same goddess by King Servius Tullius. Unlike his colleague, Carvilius gave each soldier two hundred aes rude from the spoils, and double that amount to the centurions and cavalry. This gift was received with much gratitude, especially considering his colleague's stinginess.

Consul Carvilius' popularity also helped protect Lucius Postumius, one of his legates, from prosecution. Marcus Scantius, a plebeian tribune, had started a prosecution against him accusing him of abandoning a diplomatic mission. Postumius avoided judgement before the people, it was said, through being Carvilius' legate.  As a result, the charges against him could only be used as a threat and was not enforced.