**6.1** I've described the history of the Romans in my previous five books, from the founding of Rome to its capture. This history includes the reign of kings, consuls, dictators, decemvirs, and consular tribunes, their foreign wars, and internal conflicts.

Those events are obscure due to their great antiquity, just like things are barely seen clearly from a great distance, and written records were few and rare during those times. Whatever faithful records did exist, such as the commentaries of the pontiffs and other public and private documents, were largely destroyed by the burning of Rome.

From this point going forward, more clear and faithful accounts are available to use as Rome was reborn, a second beginning similar to that of its roots. Rome became happier and more productive both at home and in the army.

Rome still relied heavily on Marcus Furius Camillus, who wasn't allowed to step down from the dictatorship until the end of the year. The citizens didn't want consular tribunes, under whose leadership the City had been captured, to oversee the elections of consular tribunes for the following year. This led to an interregnum.

During this time, the City was busy with the work and labor of rebuilding itself. Meanwhile, Gnaeus Marcius, a plebeian tribune, set a trial date for Quintus Fabius Ambustus, who had violated the Law of Nations while serving as an ambassador by fighting against the Gauls at Clusium. Fabius died before the trial, leading many to believe he had taken his own life.

The interregnum began with Publius Cornelius Scipio as interrex, followed by Marcus Furius Camillus. Camillus appointed the consular tribunes which included Lucius Valerius Publicola for the second time, Lucius Verginius, Publius Cornelius, Aulus Manlius, Lucius Aemilius, and Lucius Postumius. Upon taking office, they first consulted the Senate on religious matters. They ordered the collection of existing treaties and laws, which included the Twelve Tables and certain laws of the kings, to be found and brought to light.  Some of these were made public, while others relating to religion were kept secret by the pontiffs who used superstition to control the minds of the common people.

They then turned their attention to the issue of new "prohibition days":

July eighteenth was noted as the day of a double disaster. In the first incident, all but one of the Fabii family were slaughtered at Cremera. In the second, the Romans were routed by the Gauls at the Allia River which led to the destruction of the City of Rome. They designated the date as the Day of Allia and it was decreed that no public or private business would be conducted on this date.

Another date of significance was July sixteenth. Some believe that this was because Sulpicius, a consular tribune, had improperly offered a sacrifice on this day, and since peace with the gods had not been obtained, the Roman army was exposed to the enemy on the third day afterward. As a result, it was decreed to abstain from all religious activities on the day after this date. From this, they believe, also came that the same religious restriction for the days following the first of the month and the fifth \[or seventh\] of the month.