**6.3** While good fortune was on the side of Camillus, as the head of the Roman state, a significant crisis had occurred elsewhere. Almost all the Etruscans, having taken up arms, were laying siege to Sutrium, allies of the Roman people. Ambassadors from Sutrium appeared before the Senate, begging for help in their distressed circumstances. The Senate passed a decree that the dictator should bring aid to the Sutrians as soon as possible.

However, the Sutrians couldn't wait any longer for this promised help. Because the small population of the town was exhausted from labor, vigilance, and injuries, as the same men were continually burdened, the city was surrendered to the enemy through a treaty. The townspeople were sent out from their homes in a pitiful procession, unarmed, with only a single garment each.

At this moment, Camillus arrived with the Roman army. Seeing the sorrowful crowd prostrate at his feet, and hearing the pleas of the leaders, forced out by extreme necessity, followed by the crying of women and children who were being pulled along as companions in exile, he told the Sutrians to stop their lamentations. He would be bringing grief and tears to the Etruscans. Camillus then ordered the baggage to be left by his troops. The Sutrians would remain there with a small guard and the soldiers would follow him, armed.

Arriving in Sutrium with an unburdened army, Camillus found everything in disarray, as is common in victory; no guard at the walls, gates open, and the victors scattered, taking the spoils from the enemy's homes. Sutrium was thus retaken on the same day; the Etruscans, recently victorious, were cut down in every corner by their new enemy, without time to gather and form a group, or even to arm themselves. When the Etruscans ran to the gates of Sutrium, hoping to escape into the fields, they found the gates closed; that was the first thing the dictator had ordered. Some took up arms, others who were already armed before the chaos ensued gathered their friends to fight. A battle would have been ignited by the enemy out of sheer desperation. Instead, heralds were sent throughout the city, ordering that their weapons be dropped, that the unarmed be spared, and that no one should be harmed except those who were armed.

At that point, even those who had been determined to fight until the end, when offered a chance at life, dropped their weapons and surrendered, unarmed, to the Romans. It was the safer option, all things considered. Their number being large, they were divided among several guards; the town was returned to the Sutrians before nightfall, undamaged and free from all the horrors of war, because it hadn't been taken by force originally, but surrendered on terms.