**6.5** During the time when the state was actively engaged in construction, the plebeian tribunes tried to attract large audiences to their speeches by rehashing Agrarian Laws, proposals that would allow new land to go to plebeians instead of wealthy patricians.

The Pomptine territory was looked at with hope since Camillus had weakened the power of the Volscians, and the area was under Roman control. The plebeian tribunes accused the patricians of causing more trouble in that district than the Volscians had, stating that the Volscians only attacked if they had the strength and weapons to do so. They claimed that the patricians were taking over public land, and there would be no space left for the plebeians unless a division was made before the patricians claimed everything. However, the plebeian tribunes' arguments didn't greatly influence the plebeians, who were so focused on construction that they weren't attending the Forum in large numbers. The plebeians were also burdened by their expenses and didn't have the resources to improve the land.

In a city full of religions, even the leading men had become superstitious due to their recent misfortunes. In order to renew the auspices, the government once again resorted to an interregnum. The successive interreges were Marcus Manlius Capitolinus, Servius Sulpicius Camerinus, and Lucius Valerius Potitus. Finally, Potitus held an election of consular tribunes. He nominated Lucius Papirius, Gaius Cornelius, Gaius Sergius, Lucius Aemilius for a second time, Lucius Menenius, and Lucius Valerius Publicola for a third time. These individuals assumed their roles after the interregnum.

That year, the Temple of Mars, which had been promised during the Gallic war, was dedicated by Titus Quinctius, the duumvir responsible for performing religious rites. Four tribes were added as new citizens: the Stellatina, the Tromentina, the Sabatina, and the Arniensis. This brought the total number of tribes to twenty-five.