**6.6** The issue of the Pomptine territory was pushed forward by a plebeian tribune named Lucius Sicinius and the people attended the Assembly in greater numbers and showed a more eager desire for land than they had done before.

The Senate discussed the possibility of war with the Latins and Hernicians, but this was put on hold due to a more pressing war, as the Etruscans were preparing for battle.

Marcus Furius Camillus was again given power as a consular tribune. Five colleagues were added: Servius Cornelius Maluginensis, Quintus Servilius Fidenas for the sixth time, Lucius Quinctius Cincinnatus, Lucius Horatius Pulvillus, and Publius Valerius Potitus Publicola.

At the start of the year, the people's attention was diverted from the Etruscan war when a group of refugees from the Pomptine district entered the City and reported that the Antiates were preparing for war. They also reported that the Latin states, former allies, were now secretly allowing their young men to join the war while denying any official involvement. They claimed that they were simply not stopping volunteers from serving wherever they chose.

The Romans no longer underestimated any wars. The Senate thanked the gods for having Camillus in office because, if he had been a private citizen, they knew they would have had to appoint him as dictator. Even his colleagues admitted that, in times of war, the ultimate authority should ideally rest with that one man. They declared that the person with authority should be Camillus and they willingly yielded their authority to him. They didn't think it diminished their own dignity by yielding to the greatness of Camillus' authority. The Senate highly praised the consular tribunes.

Camillus, humbled, expressed his gratitude. He told them that the Roman people had placed a heavy burden on him by nominating him as a leader for the fourth time. The Senate had also placed a great burden on him by expressing such high opinions of him. However, the greatest burden came from the respect of his distinguished colleagues. Therefore, he promised that if any additional labor or sleepless vigilance was needed from him, he would struggle with himself to work even harder to make sure that the high opinion of him by such unanimous agreement of the state, which was the highest honor, would not only be maintained but would last.

Regarding the war and the people of Antium, he said that there was more talk of threats than actual danger. However, he advised that they should neither fear nor underestimate anything. He pointed out that since Rome was surrounded by envious and hostile neighbors, they needed multiple generals and armies to protect the City. He then addressed his colleagues:

"Publius Valerius, it's my wish that you share my authority and my strategic planning so that you can join me in leading the legions against the enemy at Antium. I want you, Quintus Servilius to organize and arm another army maintaining your camp near Rome.  I want you to be on the alert, ready to act, should any movement come from the Etruscans, as happened recently, or for any new concerns, should the Latins and the Hernicians move against us. I'm sure that you'll handle this matter in a way that honors your father, your grandfather, yourself, and your six tribuneships. A third army should be drafted by Lucius Quinctius, composed of those excused from service and elders, to guard the City and its walls. Lucius Horatius, you should provide arms, weapons, grain, and other things that are required during times of war. I want you, Servius Cornelius, to be the president of this public council, the guardian of religions, elections, laws, and all urban affairs."

All of them generously promised to execute their assigned roles. Valerius, chosen as his co-commander, added that he would consider Marcus Furius Camillus as the dictator and act as his second in command. He told them that they could have high hopes for the war, based on their opinion of their sole commander. The Senate, filled with joy, loudly expressed their optimism for both war and peace, and for the republic in general. The republic, they believed, would never need a dictator if it had such harmonious and prepared leaders, who were willing to both command and obey, and who shared praise rather than taking it for themselves alone.