**6.8** After giving the signal, Camillus jumped off his horse and grabbed the standard-bearer next to him by the hand, dragging him as he ran toward the enemy, shouting, "Advance the standard, soldier!" When the soldiers saw Camillus, now feeble in his old age, advancing against the enemy, they all charged forward together raising a shout, each eagerly crying out, "Follow the general!"

It's said that Camillus then ordered the standard to be thrown into the enemy's line, urging the Romans to go retrieve it. This is what triggered the Antiates to retreat, as the ensuing terror spread not only to their front lines but also spread to their reservists.

Roman fervor, inspired by Camillus' presence, made a significant impact. However, nothing terrified the Volscians more than the sight of Camillus. Wherever he went, he brought certain victory. This was especially clear when he quickly mounted his horse and rode with an infantry shield in hand to the left wing, which was nearly collapsing. By merely showing himself, he revived the battle by pointing out that the rest of the line was victorious.

The outcome was now certain, but the enemy's retreat was hindered by their large numbers. The tired Roman soldiers would have had a difficult time killing so many. Then a sudden violent rainstorm, pouring down in massive gusts of wind, ended not so much the battle, but the certain victory. The signal to pull back was given and nightfall ended the war, sparing the Romans any further effort. The Latins and Hernicians, having abandoned the Volscians, returned to their homes having achieved results that matched their bad decision. The Volscians, now deserted by the same people they had relied on to renew hostilities, abandoned their camp and fled to the safety of the walls of Satricum. 

Camillus first began the attack by surrounding Satricum with palisades and a rampart. However, he noticed that there was no resistance from the town. The enemy's spirit was low, and a drawn-out victory wasn't worth the effort. So, he advised his soldiers not to exhaust themselves with the same tasks as they had when they besieged Veii. He also assured them that victory was within their grasp. With the soldiers' high spirits, they attacked the walls from all sides by scaling them with ladders, finally capturing the town. The Volscians dropped their arms and surrendered.