**10.1** During the consulship of Lucius Genucius Aventinensis and Servius Cornelius Lentulus, there was a general relief from foreign wars.

Colonies were established in Sora and Alba. Six thousand colonists were sent to Alba, located in the Aequian territory. Sora, which was once part of the Volscian territory but had been taken over by the Samnites, received four thousand men.

This year, the people of Arpinum and Trebula were granted citizenship. The Frusinati were penalized by confiscating a third of their land because they were found to have incited the Hernicians to rebel. The leaders of this conspiracy were tried before the consuls, following a decree of the Senate, and were whipped with rods and beheaded. 

Nevertheless, in order not to go a complete year without war, a small campaign was launched into Umbria. Reports had come in that armed men were raiding neighboring fields, based out of a certain cave. The troops entered this dark cave with their standards and suffered many injuries, mainly from thrown stones. Eventually, they found a second opening to the cave. They blocked both entrances with wood and set them on fire. About two thousand men died from the smoke and heat. Many of them, in a desperate attempt to escape, tried to run through the flames.

Marcus Livius Denter and Marcus Aemilius Paullus took over the consulship and war with the Aequians was renewed. The Aequians were upset about the colony established in their territory, as if it were a fortress placed on its borders, and tried to seize it with their entire force. Instead, they were pushed back by the colonists, themselves.

It caused a panic in Rome, as it was hard to fathom that the Aequians, who had been weakened to the point of extinction, would dare to start a war on their own. Gaius Junius Bubulcus Brutus was appointed Dictator to suppress this uprising. Marching out with Marcus Titinius, the Master of the Horse, they defeated the Aequians in the first engagement. On the eighth day, the Dictator returned to the City in Triumph and dedicated the Temple of Salus, which he had vowed to do when he was consul and had arranged for the construction when he was censor.