**4.49** The next year, Publius Cornelius Cossus, Gaius Valerius Potitus, Quintus Quinctius Cincinnatus, and Numerius Fabius Vibulanus were elected as consular tribunes.

This year could have seen two ongoing wars, but the Veiian campaign was postponed due to the Veiian leaders' religious concerns, as the Tiber River had flooded over its banks and devastated their farmland and ruined their farmhouses.

At the same time, the Aequians, who had suffered losses from war three years before, couldn't send aid to the people of Bolae, their fellow countrymen. The Bolani had attacked the neighboring territory of Labici and caused trouble for the newly settled colonists from Rome. They had hoped to defend their aggressive actions with the support of all the Aequians. However, they were abandoned by their allies in a war not even memorable, and lost both the town and their territory by a single siege and a small battle.

Lucius Decius, a plebeian tribune, tried to pass a law to send Roman colonists to Bolae, just as had been done for Labici, but his colleagues blocked it, saying that they wouldn't allow any order from the plebeians to pass without the approval of the Senate.

The following year, the Aequians took Bolae and sent a fresh colony there who, in turn, fortified the town with new forces.

The consular tribunes in Rome were Gnaeus Cornelius Cossus, Lucius Valerius Potitus, Quintus Fabius Vibulanus for the second time, and Marcus Postumius Regillensis.

The war against the Aequians to take back Bolae was given to Postumius, a man with a depraved mind, which was revealed more in victory than in war. After energetically raising an army and marching to Bolae, Postumius weakened the Aequians in minor battles and then, vigorously pulling the army together, he marched to Bolae and burst his way into the town. He then turned the conflict from the enemy to his own citizens.

Although Postumius had promised the soldiers the spoils of war during the battle, after Bolae was recaptured, he broke that promise. I'm inclined to believe that having a leader who breaks promises likely triggered the army's displeasure a lot more than the fact that there was less loot in Bolae than Postumius had originally promised, since that city had been recently looted, and a new colony wouldn't yield much plunder. This anger increased when, after being summoned back to Rome by his colleagues because of the plebeian tribunes' seditions, his foolish and almost insane voice was heard in the assembly where Marcus Sextius, the plebeian tribune, was proposing an Agrarian Law. One of its provisions was to send colonists to Bolae stating that those who had captured the city of Bolae deserved the city and lands surrounding it. Postumius responded, "It will be a bad day for my soldiers if they don't shut up and keep quiet."

This statement deeply offended not only the Senate but the assembly. Marcus Sextius, a clever and eloquent man, saw Postumius' arrogance and unrestrained tongue as a chance to provoke him into making statements that would not only harm him, but also his cause and the entire group of consular tribunes, as well. In the past, Sextius often drew Postumius into an argument more than any other plebeian tribune. So, after such a brutal and inhuman statement, Sextius said, "Quirites, do you hear him threatening his soldiers with punishment just as if they were slaves? Yet, you consider this brute more deserving of such high honor than those who send you as colonists, give you a free gift of a city and land, provide a settlement for your old age, and fight against such cruel and arrogant adversaries in defense of your interests."

"Why would it surprise you that few people now take up your cause? What do they expect from you? Is it honors which you give to your adversaries rather than to the champions of the Roman people? You groaned just now, hearing this man's statement. What does it matter? If you were asked to vote now, would you prefer this man who threatens to harm you, rather than those who want to secure lands, and houses, and prosperity for you?"