**4.51** Quintus Fabius Vibulanus, acting as interrex, presided over the assembly where Aulus Cornelius Cossus and Lucius Furius Medullinus were elected as consuls.

At the start of their term, the Senate passed a decree: the plebeian tribunes should propose to the plebeians that an investigation into the murder of Consular Tribune Postumius be held as soon as possible. The plebeians were to appoint whoever they deemed fit to lead this investigation. By unanimous vote, the plebeians entrusted the consuls with this task.

The consuls carried out the investigation with great care and leniency, punishing only a few, who, it was believed, ended their own lives. When the matter was settled, however, they weren't able to prevent the plebeians from feeling bitterly disappointed. The plebeians were upset that measures enacted for their own benefit weren't executed in a timely manner, while a law passed in the meantime regarding their members' punishment and death was instantly executed.

After justice had been meted out for the mutiny and the death of Postumius, it would have been an opportune time to distribute the conquered land of the Bolae territory as a way to soothe the plebeians' minds. This action could have lessened their desire for the Agrarian Law, which aimed to remove the patricians from the public land they unjustly occupied. Instead, the plebeians were further upset and indignant that not only were the patricians stubbornly keeping the public lands which they already had, but they also refused to distribute the recently conquered unoccupied land to the plebeians. This land, like the rest, would soon be claimed by a few patricians.

In the same year, Consul Furius led the legions against the Volscians, who were causing havoc in the Hernician allies' territory. Finding no enemy there, the Romans captured Ferentinum, where a large number of Volscians had fled. The spoils were less than expected because the Volscians, seeing little hope of retaining the town, had taken their belongings and abandoned it at night. The town was captured the next day, as it was nearly deserted. The town and the land were then given to the Hernicians as a gift.