**4.47** The arrogance and negligence that had once been a characteristic of Roman generals due to their previous successes was now seen in the Aequians. In the first battle, Dictator Servilius disrupted the enemy's front line with a cavalry charge. He then commanded the infantry to move forward, even killing one of his own standard-bearers who hesitated. The Aequians couldn't withstand the attack and were defeated. They fled to their camp, but it was captured and looted with less effort and in less time than the battle itself.

After the Aequians' camp was seized and looted, the Dictator distributed the spoils to his soldiers. The cavalry, who had chased the fleeing enemy, reported that all the Labicans were defeated and a significant number of the Aequians had escaped to Labici. The next day, the Roman army marched to Labici. They surrounded the town and stormed the wall with ladders, thus capturing and then looting it.

The Dictator led his victorious army back to Rome and resigned his position eight days after his appointment. Before the plebeian tribunes could stir up agrarian unrest by suggesting a division of the Labican land, the Senate wisely decided in a full assembly to establish a colony in Labici. They sent one-thousand five-hundred colonists from the city, each receiving two jugera of land.

After the capture of Labici, the consular tribunes elected were Agrippa Menenius Lanatus, Gaius Servilius Structus Ahala, Publius Lucretius Tricipitinus, all for the second time, and Spurius Rutilius Crassus.

The following year the consular tribunes elected were Aulus Sempronius Atratinus who served for the third time, and Marcus Papirius Mugillanus and Spurius Nautius Rutilus who both served for the second time. For two years, there was peace abroad, but at home, there was conflict due to the renewed interest in the Agrarian Laws.