**4.48** The troublemakers of the conflict over land were elected as plebeian tribunes, Spurius Maecilius, for the fourth time, and Spurius Metilius, for the third time, while they weren't present.

They proposed a bill that the land taken from the enemy in warfare should be distributed to each man. This Agrarian Law would mean that a significant portion of the patricians' property would be taken away from them and given to the plebeians because almost all of the land, including the City itself, had been won through warfare. Only the plebeians had possession of land that had been sold or publicly assigned. This was leading to a terrible conflict between the plebeians and the patricians. The consular tribunes couldn't find a solution in the Senate or in private meetings with the patricians.

Appius Claudius, the youngest senator at the meeting and the grandson of the Appius Claudius who had been decemvir and had compiled the Laws of the Twelve Tables, suggested a solution. He said that his great-grandfather had shown the patricians a way to counter the power of the plebeian tribunes by using the vetoes of their colleagues. He believed that men who had newly risen from the plebeians to a higher rank could be easily swayed to change their opinions by influential patricians only if they were spoken to about current matters as equals, rather than being spoken down to as inferiors. He thought that their opinions were shaped by their fortunes. When they see that their colleagues are taking the lead in proposing measures and winning the plebeians support, taking all the credit for themselves, and leaving no place for them to gain favor, they would willingly support the Senate. This would help them win the favor of not only the entire Senate, but also the leading senators.

Everyone agreed with this idea, especially Quinctius Servilius Priscus, who praised the young man for not having degenerated from the old Claudian stock. The leaders of the Senate decided to try to convince as many as they could from the college of tribunes to protest with a veto. After the Senate meeting, the leading patricians approached the plebeian tribunes. They persuaded, advised, and promised them that their support would be to their benefit personally as well as the entire Senate. They managed to convince six plebeian tribunes to oppose the measure.

The next day, as had been prearranged, the proposal was presented to the Senate about the sedition stirred up by Maecilius and Metilius, regarding handing out land, a precedent of the worst kind. The leading senators gave speeches declaring that they had no advice to offer and saw no other solution but to rely on the support of the plebeian tribunes. They said that the harassed Republic, like a private citizen in distress, was looking to the power of the tribune for refuge. They argued that the honor and glory of the tribunes would be shown to be greater by restraining corrupt colleagues rather than causing trouble for the Senate and creating division among the classes.

Then a roar arose in the entire Senate as they called on the plebeian tribunes for help from every side of the Curia. After a moment of silence, the plebeian tribunes who had been persuaded by the leading men declared that they would veto the proposed measure, which the Senate believed would lead to the collapse of the Republic. The Senate formally thanked those who vetoed the measure.

Plebeian Tribunes Maecilius and Metilius, who had proposed the law then called a meeting in which they showered their colleagues with abuse, accusing them of betraying the plebeians and being slaves to the consular tribunes. They continued to use other harsh words against them, but ultimately abandoned the proposal.