**5.23** When Rome received the news of Veii's capture, Rome was filled with joy. Although the omens had been attended to and the Pythian Oracle and soothsayer's prophesies had agreed, and although they had chosen Marcus Furius Camillus as Dictator, the most renowned general of their time, nevertheless, they were still surprised by the success because the war had been fought in Veii for many years with mixed results and numerous reversals. Before the Senate could pass any decree, all the temples were filled with Roman matrons giving thanks to the gods. The Senate decreed a four-day public thanksgiving, a longer period than in any previous war.

The arrival of Dictator Camillus was also a huge event, more celebrated than any other before, with crowds from every social order pouring out to greet him. However, his Triumph greatly exceeded the usual style of honoring for such a day. The most egregious and inappropriate sight of all was the Dictator riding through the City in a chariot pulled by white horses. This was seen as disrespectful, not just for a citizen, but for any human being. The people saw it as a religious offense that the Dictator would appear to compare himself to Jupiter and Apollo whose chariots were also pulled by white horses. For this reason, his Triumph was considered more famous but not popular. He then contracted to build a temple for Juno Regina on the Aventine Hill and consecrated the Temple of Mother Matuta. After performing these services to the gods and mankind, he then resigned his dictatorship.

A debate then began to discuss the offering to Apollo. When the Dictator said that he had vowed to give a tenth of the spoils to Apollo, the pontiffs declared that the people would need to fulfill their religious obligation. It wasn't easy to devise a plan for the people to give back their spoils so that the appropriate portion could be set aside for sacred purposes. Eventually, they decided on the simplest course of action. Anyone who wished to fulfill their religious obligation and their family's obligation should estimate their share of the plunder and pay the value of a tenth of it into the treasury. This would allow for the creation of a golden offering worthy of the grandeur of the temple, the divinity of the god, and fitting for the dignity of the Roman people. But even this contribution alienated the plebeians from Camillus.

During these events, ambassadors from the Volscians and Aequians came to ask for peace. Peace was granted, not because they deserved it, but because Rome was tired from the long war and needed rest.