**5.25** These debates were filled with shameful arguments since the patricians managed to sway some of the plebeian tribunes to their side. Nothing prevented the plebeians from resorting to violence except that whenever a riot seemed imminent, the leading men of the Senate offered themselves first to the mob, ordering them to seek out, strike, and kill them first. Their age, dignity, and honorable position commanded respect, which helped to curb the crowd's anger and prevent similar attacks on others.

Camillus repeatedly chastised the assembly in many areas, saying that it wasn't surprising that the City had gone mad, which, despite being bound by a vow, they were more concerned about everything else than fulfilling their religious obligations. In all, the contribution the people had made was more like a casual donation than actually giving a tenth of their spoils back. Since everyone was now bound by this in their own private consciences, this freed the state, itself. However, his conscience made him speak out that there was still something left. While a tenth of the movable spoils were taken care of, there had been no discussion about the immovable things such as the city and its captured territory. These also would have been included in the vow.

The Senate found this point challenging to discuss, so it was delegated to the pontiffs, with Camillus being consulted. The College of Pontiffs decided that what belonged to the Veientes before the vow and came into the power of the Roman people after the vow, a tenth of it was sacred to Apollo. Thus, the city and land were evaluated. The money was taken from the treasury, and the consular tribunes were given the task to buy gold with it.

When there wasn't enough gold available, Rome's matrons held meetings to discuss the issue. By agreement, they promised to give to the consular tribunes their gold and all their ornaments, which they brought to the treasury. The Senate was particularly pleased with this, and it's said that in return for this generosity, the matrons were given the honor of using a four-wheeled covered carriage \[pilentum\] and a a two-wheeled covered carriage \[carpentum\], on festival and common days. A certain weight of gold was received from each matron and valued so that it could be paid for. It was decided that a golden bowl would be made from this gold and carried to Delphi as an offering to Apollo.

Once they had fulfilled their religious obligation, the plebeian tribunes resumed their agitation. The populace was stirred up against all the patricians, but especially against Camillus, whom they accused of reducing the spoils of Veii to nothing by confiscating and consecrating it for religious reasons. They verbally attacked him when he was absent, but when he appeared and voluntarily presented himself to the angry crowd, they were intimidated by him and were ashamed.

Realizing that the matter wouldn't be resolved that year, they re-elected the same plebeian tribunes for the following year who supported the law. The patricians tried to do the same with those who opposed the law. As a result, many of the same tribunes, plebeian and consular, were returned to office.