**4.46** The decision was made that the draft shouldn't be drawn from the entire population indiscriminately. Instead, ten tribes were selected by lot. The two consular tribunes, Lucius Sergius and Marcus Papirius, recruited the young men of military age from these tribes and led them to war.

The disputes of the two consular tribunes that began between them in the City then escalated in the camp due to their intense desire for supreme command. They disagreed on every issue, each advocating for their own views. Each wanted his own strategies and commands to be the only one followed. They held mutual contempt for each other until, after the intervention of the legates, it was finally agreed that the consular tribunes would alternate supreme command every other day.

When news of these events reached Rome, Quintus Servilius, a man of age and experience in public service, is said to have prayed to the gods that the consular tribunes' quarreling wouldn't harm the state as it had at Veii. Anticipating a looming disaster, he urged his son, Consular Tribune Gaius Servilius, to enlist soldiers and prepare weapons. His foresight wasn't misplaced.

Under the leadership of Consular Tribune Sergius, whose turn it was, the Romans engaged the Aequians on unfavorable terrain near the enemy's camp. Since the enemy had retreated to the rampart in feigned fear, Sergius was lured there by the false hope of storming and capturing the camp. But the Aequi, launching a surprise attack across the valley, routed the Romans pushing them down the slope and many were killed, more by the great fall from the steep slope and the ensuing chaos than by the enemy, themselves.

The Roman camp barely held on that day and on the following day, when the enemy had already largely surrounded it, the Romans abandoned it in a disgraceful retreat through the opposite gate. The consular tribunes, legates, and the strongest part of the main army who stayed close to the standards, retreated to Tusculum. Others, scattered across the fields, rushed to Rome by various routes, reporting a greater loss than had actually occurred.

The panic was somewhat lessened because the outcome matched the plebeians' fears and because reinforcements had been prepared by Consular Tribune Servilius. Following his orders, once the City's unrest was calmed by the lower magistrates, scouts were immediately sent out. They reported that the consular tribunes and the army were at Tusculum and that the enemy hadn't moved their camp.

The most uplifting news was that Quintus Servilius Priscus was appointed Dictator by a decree of the Senate. His wisdom in public affairs had been proven on many occasions, including the recent war, as he was the only one who had foreseen the consequences of the consular tribunes' disputes before the disaster occurred. He appointed his own son, Consular Tribune Gaius Servilius Ahala, who had appointed him Dictator, as his Master of the Horse, and led his newly enlisted army to war. After summoning to war those who were at Tusculum, Dictator Servilius set up his camp two miles from the enemy.