**5.44** "People of Ardea, old friends and now my new fellow citizens, thanks to your kindness and my good fortune, don't think that I've forgotten my own situation. The current crisis and our shared danger require everyone to contribute to the common good in whatever way they can. How else will I be able to repay you for your kindness to me, if not now? And where else will you benefit from me, if not in war?"

"My skill in warfare secured my position back home, undefeated in war. In peace, I was exiled by ungrateful fellow citizens. But for you, men of Ardea, Fortune has given you a chance to repay all the past favors given to you by the Roman people, which you all remember well. You also have the opportunity to gain great military fame for your city by defeating our common enemy."

"The Gauls are now on their way, but in a disorganized mob. Nature has given them bodies and spirits that are large but not strong. For that reason, they bring more terror than real strength into a conflict. Let the disaster of Rome serve as a lesson. They captured Rome when it was wide open, yet it only requires a small group of men from the Citadel to resist them."

"Now, already exhausted by the slow siege, they are abandoning their original plans and scattering throughout the countryside. After gorging themselves on food and wine, quickly getting drunk, they will lie down like wild animals near streams at night, without any fortifications, guards, or outposts. Overconfident from their success, they're more careless than usual. If you're willing to defend your own walls and prevent this city from becoming a part of Gaul, take up arms in full force at the first watch and follow me to a slaughter, not to a battle. If I don't deliver them to you, bound by sleep and ready to be slaughtered like cattle, I won't refuse the same fate at Ardea as I had at Rome."