**5.48** The worst hardship of the siege and war was the famine that was affecting both armies.

The Gauls were also suffering from disease. Their camp lay among burial mounds which was scorched from the fires and filled with heat and steam. The wind would often stir up the ashes from the burning fires, not just dust. The Gauls, who were used to cooler, damp climates, struggled with the heat and smoke. Many fell ill and were dying of common diseases, much like a disease spreading through livestock. And now, through weariness, they stopped burying the dead individually and started burning the bodies in large pyres indiscriminately. This led to the area being known as Bustorum Gallicorum or the Funeral Pyres of the Gauls.

Afterward, the Gauls called a truce with the Romans and meetings were held with the commanders' permission for their soldiers to talk to each another. During these meetings, the Gauls frequently taunted the Romans about their famished state and told them give up and surrender. To counter that impression, the Romans were said to have showered bread down from the Capitoline Hill upon the outposts of the Gauls to give the illusion of plenty.

While this strategy worked temporarily, there came a time when the famine couldn't be hidden nor endured any longer. While Dictator Camillus was busy recruiting soldiers, he ordered his Master of the Horse, Lucius Valerius Potitus, to bring his army from Veii, and he prepared and equipped it such that he could attack the Gauls on equal terms. The army on the Capitoline Hill was growing tired. They were exhausted from standing guard day and night, having overcome all manner of human suffering except one that nature does not allow to be conquered: hunger. Day after day, they watched for some sign of help from the Dictator. Eventually, not only food but also morale began to run out as they staggered to duty, emaciated, with their weapons feeling heavy in their weakened hands. They wanted to either surrender or negotiate with the Gauls, who hinted that they might be persuaded to abandon the siege for a reasonable price.

The Senate then convened and the consular tribunes were given the task of making a bargain. The matter was settled during a conference between Quintus Sulpicius, the consular tribune, and Brennus, the leader of the Gauls. They agreed on a ransom of a thousand pounds of gold. This was the price for a people who were destined to rule the world.

An additional insult was added to the already disgraceful act; the Gauls brought false weights. When Sulpicius objected, Brennus insolently threw his sword onto the scales, saying something that was intolerably offensive to Roman ears: "Woe to the vanquished!"