**5.50** His first act, as someone who was very careful about performing religious duties, was to present to the Senate all matters relating to the immortal gods:

He passed a decree that all the temples, which had been taken over by the enemy, should be restored. Their boundaries should be marked, rededicated, and purified. The form of purification should be sought in the sacred books by the duumviri.

A hospitality agreement was proposed to be created with the people of Caere, as they had provided a safe place for the sacred items of the Roman people and their priests. Due to the kindness of these people, the worship of the immortal gods hadn't been interrupted.

The Capitoline Games were to be held, as Jupiter Optimus Maximus had protected his own temple and the Citadel of the Roman people when they were in danger. Camillus should establish a college for this purpose, comprised of those who resided on the Capitoline Hill and in the Citadel.

He also mentioned the need to make amends to the voice heard at night, which had announced the disaster before the war with the Gauls had occurred and had been ignored. A temple was ordered to be built on the Via Nova for Aius Locutius.

It couldn't be determined what gold had been recovered from the Gauls and what gold had been taken from the other temples and hastily stored in the Temple of Jupiter Optimus Maximus during the panic. It was all commingled together such that it was unclear how much gold should be returned and to which temples it would be returned. The Senate thus decreed that the gold was all now considered sacred and ordered it to be placed under Jupiter's throne.

The state had also accepted gold from the matrons of Rome to pay off the Gauls' ransom, since there was not enough public gold and so that sacred gold wouldn't need to be used. These matrons were now formally thanked, and they were awarded the honor of having solemn eulogies given at their funerals after their deaths, just as the men did.

After finishing matters related to the gods and the measures that could be handled through the Senate, the Dictator finally addressed the plebeian tribunes who had been constantly urging the plebeians to leave the ruins of Rome and move to Veii, a city ready for them. Accompanied by the entire Senate, he ascended the platform and began to speak: