**4.39** When the Volscian general saw this new cohort of the Romans with parma shields could no longer be resisted, he signaled for a path to be opened for them. The plan was to let them rush forward in their eagerness, separating them from their horses and then the Volscians would close in behind. Once this was accomplished, the Roman cavalry would be cut off. The Roman cohort wouldn't be able to force their way back through the same route they had come, as the enemy was most concentrated there.

Consul Sempronius and the Roman legions, now unable to locate the cohort unit that had previously been a shield for the entire army, feared that the enemy would slaughter these brave men. So, they advanced regardless of the risk.

The Volscians, forming two fronts, withstood the Consul and the legions on one side, while the other front pressed on Commander Tempanius and the cavalry. Despite numerous attempts, Tempanius and his cavalry couldn't break through to their own side. Instead, they occupied a hill and defended themselves in a circular formation, managing to inflict damage on the Volscians. The battle didn't end until nightfall and Consul Sempronius didn't let up, determined to keep the enemy engaged as long as there was light.

The uncertainty of the outcome caused panic in both camps when night fell. Leaving their wounded and much of their baggage behind, both armies retreated to the nearby mountains as if they had been defeated. The hill continued to be surrounded by the Volscians until after midnight. When the Volscians heard that their camp had been abandoned, they became afraid, assuming that their own side had been defeated, and fled into the darkness of night.

Commander Tempanius, wary of a trap, kept his men on the hill until dawn. He then descended with a few men to scout the area. Having questioned some of the wounded Volscians, he learned that the Volscian camp had been deserted. Overjoyed, he called his soldiers down from the hill and they entered the Roman camp. Here, he found the Roman camp was empty and deserted with the same foul scene as in the enemy's camp. He quickly gathered all the wounded he could carry with him. Unsure of Consul Sempronius' whereabouts, he took the shortest route back to Rome before the Volscians could realize their mistake and return.