**10.15** The Apulians had planned to unite with the Samnites before the battle. However, Consul Decius set up camp against them near Maleventum and, after drawing them out to fight, he defeated them. There, too, the battle resulted in more flight than slaughter. Two thousand Apulians were killed.

Decius, holding them in contempt as a weak enemy, led his legions into Samnium. There, the two consular armies, moving in different directions, ravaged the country for a period of five months, leaving it in ruins. The consuls set up their camps in numerous locations in Samnium. Consul Decius camped in forty-five places, and Consul Fabius had eighty-six different camps. They not only left behind physical signs of their presence, such as the remains of ramparts and trenches, but also widespread devastation and depopulated areas of the surrounding country. Fabius also captured the city of Cimetra, taking two thousand nine hundred armed men prisoner and killing about nine hundred and thirty fighting men in the assault. 

After this, he returned to Rome to oversee the elections. The centuries who voted first all voted for Quintus Fabius. 

Among the candidates was the energetic and ambitious Appius Claudius. While he wanted to attain the honor for himself, he also wanted to restore both consul positions to the patricians. He used all his influence and the strength of the entire nobility to try to convince them to appoint him consul alongside Quintus Fabius. Fabius objected, citing the same reasons he had given the previous year. All the patricians surrounded his chair, pleading with him to elevate the consulship from the mire of the plebeians and restore its former majesty with honor to the patrician rank. 

Once silence was restored, Fabius calmed the enthusiasm of the people with a speech. He would have accepted two patrician names if he had seen someone other than himself chosen for the consulship. However, he would not set a bad example by including his own name among the candidates, as it was against the laws.

As a result, Appius Claudius Caecus and Lucius Volumnius Flamma Violens, a plebeian, were elected consuls, the same partnering as in their previous consulship. The nobility criticized Fabius for refusing to work with Appius Claudius, who was clearly superior in eloquence and political skills.