**10.16** After the elections were concluded, the previous consuls were instructed to continue their command for six more months and carry on the war in Samnium. In the following year, under the consulship of Lucius Volumnius and Appius Claudius, Publius Decius continued as proconsul, having been left (as consul) in Samnium by his colleague. He relentlessly wreaked havoc throughout the region and finally drove the Samnite army, which never dared to confront him directly, completely out of their territory.

Now forced from their own homeland, the Samnites redirected their path toward Etruscan territory. Unsuccessful diplomatic efforts might now bear fruit, they thought, given the strength of their armed forces and the fear which they could instill. They demanded a council of the Etruscan leaders and, in the meeting, recounted the many years they had been at war with the Romans in the name of freedom. They had tried everything to see if, by their own strength, they could bear the heavy burden of fighting the war on their own. They had even sought the help of neighboring nations, which proved to be of little help.

When they could no longer sustain the fight, they pleaded with the Roman people for peace. However, they had to take up arms again because they found peace under servitude more unbearable than war as free men. Their only remaining hope was in the Etruscans. They acknowledged that this nation was the richest in Italy in arms, men, and money. The Etruscans had the Gauls as their immediate neighbors, who were born amidst war and weapons. So fierce was Gallic courage that the Gauls bragged about how they had captured and ransomed the Romans for gold. It was a boast which they did not make in vain.

Nothing was lacking, they said, if only the Etruscans possessed the spirit which had once belonged to Porsena and their forefathers, to drive the Romans out of all the land on this side of the Tiber and force them to fight for their own survival instead of maintain their oppressive rule over Italy. The Samnites assured the Etruscans that their army was prepared for battle, equipped with weapons, well-funded, and willing to follow them immediately, even if it meant attacking the City of Rome itself.