**10.26** Upon his return to Rome, Fabius spoke in the Senate and to the people in a way that neither exaggerated nor downplayed any aspect of the war.

The agreement to share command with another general, he emphasized, was more about easing the fears of others than protecting himself or the Republic. Moreover, if they were to give him a helper in the war, and a partner in command, how could he forget Consul Publius Decius, whom he had worked with many times before? There was no one else he would rather share command with. With Publius Decius, he would have enough forces, and never too many enemies. However, if his colleague preferred a different role, then they should give him Lucius Volumnius as an assistant. 

The people, the Senate, and even his colleague, Decius, left all decisions to Fabius. Then Decius announced that he was ready to go to either the Etruscan territory or Samnium, whichever was required.  There was such widespread gladness and congratulations that it felt like they were celebrating a victory, not preparing for war.

Some historians say that Fabius and Decius left for the Etruscan territory as soon as they took office, without any mention of drawing lots for provinces or the disputes I've described. Others, not content with just describing these disputes, have added accusations of misconduct made before the people by Claudius against Fabius, who was absent at the time. They also describe a stubborn resistance by the praetor against the consul when he was present. And they added another disagreement between the colleagues, with Decius insisting that each consul should manage his own separate province by lot. However, the facts start to become clear once both consuls leave for the campaign.

Before the consuls arrived in the Etruscan territory, the Senone Gauls came with a great multitude to Clusium intending to attack the Roman legion and the camp. Scipio, the camp commander, tried to compensate for his lack of troops by taking a strategic position on a hill which was between the city and the camp. However, in his haste, he failed to scout the area properly and found the enemy already at the top of the hill which they had approached from the opposite side. Thus, the legion was cut down from the rear and the middle was surrounded with the enemy pressing in on every side.

Some historians say that the legion was destroyed there, so that no news of it survived. Nor was the news of the defeat conveyed to the consuls, who weren't far from Clusium, before they saw the cavalry of the Gauls in the distance carrying the severed heads of the slain hanging from their horses' chests and impaled on their lances, chanting their customary songs of victory.

Others claim that the defeat was at the hands of the Umbrians, not the Gauls, and that the losses weren't as severe. They say that a group of foragers led by Lucius Manlius Torquatus, a legate, were cut off by the Umbrians, and that Scipio, the propraetor, brought reinforcements and renewed the battle, defeating the victorious Umbrians and taking their prisoners and spoils.

However, it's more likely that the defeat was at the hands of the Gauls rather than the Umbrians because the fear of a major war with the Gauls, which had often troubled the Romans, were in that year particularly alarming. The Roman government took extraordinary measures to prevent it. Therefore, both consuls, Fabius and Decius, were sent to the Etruscan territory with a large army, consisting of: four legions, a large strong Roman cavalry, one thousand elite Campanian cavalry specially chosen for this war, and a large army of allies and Latins, larger than even the Roman army themselves.

Two additional armies were stationed not far from Rome to guard against a potential attack from the Etruscans. One was positioned in the territory of the Falerii, the other was stationed in the Vatican field. Two propraetors, Gnaeus Fulvius and Lucius Postumius Megellus, were ordered to hold those positions as permanent camps.