**10.25** Almost all the younger citizens quickly gathered around Consul Fabius, each giving his own name, so great was the desire to serve under his leadership. As the large crowd surrounded him, he announced, "My plan is to enlist only four thousand infantry and six hundred cavalry. Those of you who give their names today and tomorrow, I'll take with me. I'm more concerned with bringing all my soldiers back wealthy, than with having a large army."

Next, he set out with a suitable number of men, who were more hopeful and confident because a large army wasn't needed, and marched toward the town of Aharna, not far from the enemy, to the camp of Appius Claudius, the praetor.

When they were a few miles away from camp, they encountered men sent to gather wood, accompanied by a guard. Recognizing the lictors leading the Consul and learning who he was, they offered thanks to the gods and to the Roman people for having sent him as their leader.

The men saluted to show their respect and Fabius asked where they were headed. When they said they were going to get wood, he asked, "Really? Don't you have a rampart around your camp?" To this they exclaimed that there was indeed a rampart, two of them, and a ditch. But they were still afraid for their lives. He said, "Then you have enough wood.  Go back and tear down the rampart."

They returned to the camp and began leveling the rampart, creating panic among the soldiers as well as Appius himself. But then each of them passed the word along to the others that they were acting on the orders of the consul, Quintus Fabius. The next day, the camp was removed and the praetor, Appius Claudius, was sent back to Rome.

From then on, the Romans didn't have a fixed camp anywhere. The consul argued that it was harmful for an army to stay in one place and that frequent marches and changes of location made it healthier as far as the winter would permit.

As spring began, he left the second legion near Clusium, formerly known as Camars, and gave command of the camp to Lucius Scipio, as propraetor.

Fabius then returned to Rome to plan for the war, either because he realized it was more serious than he had thought, or because he was summoned by a decree of the Senate. Both opinions are found in historical sources. Some believe that he was forced back because Appius Claudius, the praetor, had exaggerated the danger of the Etruscan war in the Senate and among the people, something he had constantly done by his letters, arguing that one general or one army would not be enough to oppose four nations. Praetor Claudius said there was danger regardless of whether they attacked as a combined unit or fought separately on multiple fronts; one man wouldn't be able to do everything at once.

Claudius pointed out that Fabius had left only two Roman legions in the Etruscan territory and had arrived in Rome with fewer than 5,000 infantry and cavalry. Consul Decius, he said, should depart for the Etruscan territory as soon as possible to support his colleague. Lucius Volumnius should be given command of Samnium. If Decius preferred to command his own province, then Volumnius should be sent to the Etruscan territory with a fully equipped consular army.

Since many in the Senate were persuaded by Claudius' speech, Consul Decius proposed that all decisions regarding the war should remain in Consul Fabius' hands until Fabius himself could return to Rome for consultation, if it was in the Republic's best interest. Alternatively, Fabius could send a legate to inform the Senate of the true extent of the war with the Etruscans and decide how many forces were needed and how many commanders should be assigned.