**10.23** That year was marked by numerous strange occurrences. To counteract these, the Senate ordered supplications for two days to please the gods. The public funded the wine and incense for the sacrifices, and large groups of men and women attended the event. A notable incident during this prayer event was a dispute among the matrons in the Temple of Patrician Chastity located in the Boarium Forum near the round Temple of Hercules.

The conflict centered on Verginia, a patrician by birth and daughter of Aulus, who married Consul Volumnius, a plebeian. She was barred from participating in the sacred rites by the patrician matrons because she had married a plebeian, outside the patrician order. What started as a brief verbal dispute arising from feminine anger soon escalated into a full-blown argument in a conflict of minds.

Virginia rightfully claimed that she was entitled to enter the Temple of Patrician Chastity due to her patrician birth, and her chastity. She was a virgin when she first entered the temple, and was married to a single husband, to whom she was betrothed as a virgin. She proudly proclaimed that she had no complaints about her husband, his achievements, or his honors.

To emphasize her strong words, she performed a significant act. She partitioned part of her house on Long Street, where she lived, to create a small chapel from the part of the building that was large enough for it and erected an altar there. She then gathered the plebeian matrons and, after expressing her grievances about the unfair treatment from the patrician women, she declared, "I dedicate this altar to Plebeian Chastity. I urge you to maintain the same level of competition among the women of this state for chastity as the men have for bravery. I also ask that you do your best to ensure that this altar is revered for its greater sanctity and is attended by more virtuous women than the other, if possible."

The rites performed at this altar were similar to those at the older altar. Only matrons of proven chastity who were married to one husband had the right to sacrifice. However, this shrine became popular due to the inclusion of immoral women and not just matrons only, but women of all sorts and it finally passed into oblivion.

That year Gnaeus and Quintus Olgulnius, who were curule aediles, prosecuted several moneylenders, bringing them to trial. The fines imposed on them generated a significant sum of money which was redirected to public works.

From the funds, the following were provided: bronze thresholds were installed on the Capitoline Hill; silver vessels were provided for the three silver tables in the inner chapel of Jupiter; a statue of Jupiter in a four-horse chariot was placed on the temple roof; and statues were placed of the City's founders as infants under the wolf's teats at the Ruminal fig-tree. They also paved the roads from the Capuan Gate to the Temple of Mars with square stones.

And from the money collected as fines by the plebeian aediles, Lucius Aelius Paetus and Gaius Fulvius Curvus, who prosecuted convicted cattle-grazers, games were held and golden bowls were placed in the Temple of Ceres.