**8.23** The Senate was informed by both consuls that there was little chance of peace with the Samnites. Publilius had recovered Palaeopolis, along with two thousand soldiers from Nola and four thousand Samnites. This was more of a forced decision by the Nolans than a choice by the Greeks.

Cornelius reported that a troop draft had been ordered by the Samnites. All of Samnium was preparing for war, and neighboring states of Privernum, Fundi, and Formiae were being openly stirred up and asked to join them. Thus, it was decided that ambassadors should be sent to the Samnites before starting a war with them.

But the Samnites responded defiantly. They defended themselves against the accusations, but they also did not deny the charges against them. The Greeks, they claimed, were not helped by them with any official authorization or support. Nor had they stirred up the people of Fundi or Formiae . With that being said, they made no apologies for their strength. If war was what Rome desired, they would welcome it.

They admitted that they could not hide their outrage that the Romans had rebuilt Fregellae, a city they had taken from the Volscians and destroyed. The Romans had then established a colony within Samnite territory, which the colonists again named Fregellae. The Samnites considered it an insult and an injury. Unless it was removed by those who had caused it, the Samnites would drive them out by force.

When the Roman ambassador suggested discussing the issue with their mutual allies and friends, their magistrate replied:

"What is so complicated? Romans, our differences will not be decided by the words of ambassadors or by any human arbitration, but on the plains of Campania, where we must meet in battle; and by our arms, and by Mars, our common god of war and who will settle the point. Accordingly, let us camp together between Capua and Suessula to determine whether the Samnites or the Romans shall rule Italy."

The Roman ambassadors responded that they would not go where the enemy had called them, but where their commanders led them.

Meanwhile, Publilius had seized a strategic position between Palaepolis and Neapolis, breaking up a mutual aid alliance with the enemies, which they had been using to support each other when they needed help.

As the election day approached, it was deemed unwise to recall Publilius from his siege, as he was standing before the enemy's walls hoping, daily, to capture the city. The tribunes were asked to propose to the people that Quintus Publilius Philo, once his consulship had ended, should remain in command as proconsul and conduct the affairs of the consulship until the war with the Greeks was over. 

A letter was sent to Consul Lucius Cornelius, ordering him to appoint a dictator, as it was not appropriate to recall him from the war already underway in Samnium. He sent a letter nominating Marcus Claudius Marcellus as Dictator, who appointed Spurius Postumius as Master of the Horse.

However, the elections weren't held by the Dictator because there was a question about the religious legality of his appointment and an inquiry was held. The augurs were consulted and declared that the Dictator appeared to be flawed. The plebeian tribunes were then suspicious and argued against this, claiming that it was unlikely that such a flaw could have been discovered since the nomination by the consul occurred silently in the middle of the night. Nor had the consul publicly stated it to anyone. It was written privately. No mortal had witnessed or heard anything that would invalidate the auspices. Furthermore, they questioned how the augurs, sitting in Rome, could have divined any flaw that might have occurred in the consul's auspices while he was in the camp. They suggested that the real issue was that the Dictator was a plebeian and that's what the augur's are calling flawed. Despite their arguments, the matter resulted in an interregnum and the elections were postponed.

After several delays for one reason or another, the fourteenth interrex, Lucius Aemilius, at last elected as consuls, Gaius Poetelius and Lucius Papirius Mugillanus. I find the name Cursor instead of Mugillanus recorded in some annals.