**8.25** This year, for the fifth time since the city was built, a lectisternium was held at Rome to seek the favor of the same gods as before. After the election of the new consuls, Gaius Poetelius and Lucius Papirius Cursor, following the people's command, the consuls sent representatives to declare war on the Samnites. 

They prepared for this war with more vigor than they had for the war against the Greeks. Unexpectedly, they gained allies. The Lucanians and Apulians, nations that hadn't previously interacted with the Romans, offered an alliance, promising to provide soldiers and weapons for the war. They were accepted into an alliance and a treaty of friendship was agreed upon. 

Meanwhile, the Romans were successful in Samnium. They captured three towns, Allifae, Callifae, and Rufrium, and devastated the surrounding countryside.

The end of another war in which the Greeks were besieged in Palaepolis was also progressing well and the end seemed imminent. Not only was the enemy cut off from one part of the fortifications, but also the people of Palaepolis were suffering greatly within their own walls. The conditions they were under inside the city were far worse than the threat posed by the Roman forces outside. They were treated badly by their own allied defenders and had been experiencing the kind of horrors usually only associated with a city being captured and sacked. They suffered indignities and their children and spouses also suffered unworthily.

When they heard rumors that reinforcements were coming from Tarentum and the Samnites, they weren't happy. They already had more Samnites within their walls than they could bear. However, being Greeks, they eagerly awaited the young men from Tarentum, who were also Greeks. They hoped that these reinforcements would help them resist their Samnite and Nolan defenders, who were occupying the city under the guise of an alliance, as well as the Romans.

In the end, it appeared to the people that surrendering to the Romans seemed like the lesser evil.

Two leading men in the city, Charilaus and Nymphius, devised a plan. One would defect to the Roman general, and the other would stay behind to see to the city's surrender at the right moment.

Charilaus went to Publilius Philo, the Roman general. For the good fortune of the people of Palaepolis and the Roman people, he said, he planned to hand over the fortifications to him. Whether this act would be seen as betrayal or preservation of his country depended on the Romans' honor. He asked nothing for himself, but he requested that if the plan succeeded, the Romans would remember their eagerness and risk in seeking to return to their alliance, rather than their foolishness and recklessness in straying from their duty. The general praised him and gave him three thousand soldiers to take control of the part of the city occupied by the Samnites, appointing Lucius Quinctius, a military tribune, to command the force.