**8.26** Concurrently, Nymphius cleverly persuaded the leader of the Samnites that, as all the Roman troops were stationed around Palaepolis or occupied at Samnium, he should be allowed to sail to Roman territory with the fleet to raid not only the sea coast but also the Roman countryside near the city itself. In order to deceive him, however, he explained that they needed to depart at night and launch the ships immediately to avoid detection. To expedite this, all young men of the Samnites, except those guarding the city, were sent to the shore. Nymphius wasted time in the darkness by intentionally giving conflicting orders to create confusion, which was amplified by the large crowd getting in each other's way. 

Meanwhile, Charilaus, following the agreed plan, was let into the city by his allies. After filling the city's upper parts with Roman soldiers, he ordered them to shout. The Greeks, who had been previously instructed by their leaders, remained silent.

The Nolans immediately escaped through the city's opposite side, fleeing on the road back to Nola. The Samnites, who had been shut out of the city, had an easier but more shameful escape. They returned home unarmed, stripped of their possessions, as they had left everything behind for their enemies. They became a laughingstock, not only to foreigners but also to their own people.

I'm aware that there is another version of this event, suggesting that the Samnites betrayed the town. However, I choose to follow authors who are more worthy of belief. And then because the treaty with Neapolis, where the entire outcome of the Greek cause came to rest, suggests that the Greeks willingly renewed their friendship.

A Triumph was awarded to Publilius Philo on the grounds that the enemy had agreed to surrender to the Romans. These two unprecedented distinctions were granted to this man: an extension of his command \[proconsul\] never before given to anyone, and a Triumph performed with honor to someone after his term had ended.