**6.37** Sextius, Licinius, and Fabius made these statements, both infuriating and pitiful to hear, and ended up stirring up more indignation in the listeners than the speakers themselves felt. They continued, saying that there would never be an end to the patricians' land occupation or their exploitation of the plebeians through usury unless the plebeians were allowed to elect one consul from among the plebeians to protect their freedom. 

The plebeian tribunes were now despised, they said, because their power was undermined by the other plebeian tribunes using the veto against them. There could be no justice when one group, the patricians, held all the power of imperium, and the other group, the plebeians, only had the right to veto.

Unless power was shared, the plebeians would never have an equal part in the republic. No one should anyone think it would be sufficient that plebeian candidates are being considered in the consular elections; unless it was made mandatory for at least one consul to be a plebeian, no plebeian would be elected. Had it already been forgotten that when it was decided to create consular tribunes rather than consuls, it was so that the highest honor could also be available to plebeians. However, no plebeian was elected consular tribune for forty-four years.

How could anyone think, they asked, that the patricians would willingly share the honor with the plebeians when there were only two positions available, especially considering the patricians had monopolized the eight positions in the election of consular tribunes? The plebeians needed a law to achieve what they couldn't achieve through influence at elections. One consul position should be set aside, out of the reach of patrician competition, for the plebeians to access. If it were left open to dispute, it would always be won by the more powerful group.

It couldn't also be said, as they were accustomed to boast before, that there were no qualified men among the plebeians for curule magistracies. Had the government been run with less energy and less strength since Publius Licinius Calvus was consular tribune? He was the first plebeian elected to that office, and before that it had been only patricians as consular tribunes. Indeed, several patricians had been condemned after their tribuneship, but no plebeians.

A few years earlier, quaestors, like the consular tribunes, also started to be elected from the plebeians, and the Roman people hadn't regretted any of them. The consul position was still out of reach for the plebeians; it was the citadel of liberty, the pinnacle of power. If they could achieve that, then the Roman plebeians would feel that kings had truly been expelled from the City and their freedom was secure. From that day, everything that the patricians had which made them patricians would flow also to the plebeians, including imperium, honor, military glory, lineage, and nobility. These would be great things to be enjoyed by them and would be even greater for their children.

When the patricians saw that these speeches were being well received, they proposed a new idea: instead of having two duumvirs for performing religious rites, ten should be appointed, with half being elected from the plebeians and half from the patricians. 

They then postponed the election of all these bills until the arrival of the army that was besieging Velitrae.