**6.40** In response to the obstinate speech of the plebeian tribunes, when the other senators were shocked in astonishment and left speechless by the indignity of the situation, Appius Claudius Crassus, the grandson of the decemvir, is said to have stepped forward to challenge their claims. His motivation was less about trying to persuade them and driven more by hatred and anger to oppose them.

He spoke along these lines: "Quirites, it isn't new or surprising to me that I hear the same accusation that has always been leveled against our family by the seditious tribunes. They claim that we, the Claudian family, from the very beginning, have always prioritized the dignity of the patricians over the interests of the plebeians. I don't deny this first point. Since we first were admitted into the City and the patricians, we have done our best to ensure that the dignity of those families, among whom you chose to include us, has increased rather than decreased."

"As for the second point, I dare to contend, for myself and my ancestors, Quirites, that unless someone believes that actions taken on behalf of the entire Republic are somehow hostile to the plebeians, as if they were citizens of a different city, no one can truthfully claim that we have done anything knowingly to act against the interests of the plebeians either as private persons or as magistrates. Nor can any deed or word of ours be truly reported against your interest even if some of them were against your wishes. Even if I weren't from the Claudian family or of patrician descent, but simply a mere Quirite, as long as I knew that I was born of free parents and lived in a free state I'd still speak out against the arrogance of Lucius Sextius and Gaius Licinius. These men have been perpetual plebeian tribunes for nine years and have become so arrogant that they refuse to allow you to vote freely in elections or in passing laws."

"They say, 'On one condition will we allow you to re-elect us as tribunes for the tenth time.' This is like them saying, 'We're so disgusted with the job that we won't accept the position without you paying some great reward.' And what is this reward after all? To have them always as plebeian tribunes? No, it's 'that you accept the laws we propose all together, whether you like them or not, whether they're beneficial or harmful.' "

"I beseech you, you 'Tarquinian' plebeian tribunes, imagine me as a citizen from the middle of the assembly yelling out, 'With your permission, let's read which laws are to our benefit and allow us to reject the others.' 'No,' they reply, 'you can't vote for the laws concerning debt interest and land distribution, which affect you all, without accepting this monstrous proposition of seeing Lucius Sextius and Gaius Licinius as consuls, a sight you abhor and detest; either take all, or we grant you nothing!' It's like someone mixing poison into food and offering it to a starving man telling him either to abstain from what is vital or to consume what will kill him."

"Therefore, if this state were free, wouldn't you all have shouted, 'Leave with your tribuneships and your petitions!' If they'll not propose what is in the interest of the people, will there be no one else who will? If any patrician, or more unpopularly, any Claudius were to say, 'Accept all, or I'll propose nothing,' which of you Quirites would accept it?  Will you never judge laws by their merit rather than who are the authors? Will you always listen readily to what the plebeian tribune says and refuse to listen to any of us, no matter what?"

"By Hercules, that speech isn't at all civil. But what of the proposal which they're angry about because you rejected it. The proposal is just like the speech, Quirites. He says, 'I propose that you shall not be allowed to elect the consuls you want.' Or does he ask that at least one consul be elected from the plebeians but doesn't allow you to elect two patricians. If there were wars today like the Etruscan war, when Porsena occupied Janiculum, or like the war with the Gauls recently, when everything except the Capitoline Hill and the Citadel was in enemy hands, and Lucius Sextius were a candidate for consul with Marcus Furius Camillus or any other patrician, could you accept that Sextius should be consul without any risk, while Camillus should risk being rejected? Is it fair that two plebeians can be elected consuls, but not two patricians? That one must be elected from the plebeians, but both the patricians are allowed to be passed by? What kind of society and what kind of partnership is that?"

"Is it not enough for you to share in what you had no part in before, unless you seize the whole while asking for a part? 'I fear,' he says, 'that if it's permitted to choose two patricians, no plebeian will be elected.' This is the same as saying, 'Because you won't willingly elect unworthy plebeians, I'll force you to elect plebeians you don't want.' What follows is that if one plebeian is a candidate with two patricians, he owes no gratitude to the people for his election. He can say that he was appointed by law, not by votes."