**6.42** Appius Claudius' speech only resulted in delaying the approval of the proposed laws. The same plebeian tribunes, Sextius and Licinius, were re-elected for the tenth time and managed to pass a law stating that there should now be ten rather than two duumvirs for religious matters and half of the ten duumvirs should be elected from the plebeians. Five patricians and five plebeians were elected, and the plebeians felt that they had set a precedent to pave the way for the consulship. 

The plebeians, satisfied with this victory, agreed to the patricians' proposal to elect consular tribunes instead of consuls for the time being. The elected consular tribunes were Aulus Cornelius Cossus for the second time, Marcus Cornelius Maluginensis for the second time, Marcus Geganius Macerinus, Publius Manlius Capitolinus for the second time, Lucius Veturius Crassus Cicurinus for the second time, and Publius Valerius Potitus Publicola for the sixth time. 

It was a time of relative peace, with the only exception being that of an ongoing siege of Velitrae. Though slow in ending, the result was certain. 

The Romans were suddenly faced with the threat of another war with the Gauls. As a result, Marcus Furius Camillus was appointed Dictator for the fifth time. He chose Titus Quinctius Poenus, the Carthaginian, as his Master of the Horse. 

Claudius claims that a battle took place that year with the Gauls on the banks of the Anio River. He also mentions the famous battle on the bridge where Titus Manlius killed a Gaul who had challenged him, in full view of both armies, and took his torc as spoils. 

However, several other writers suggest that these events occurred at least ten years later. They claim that, in this year, a decisive battle was fought with the Gauls in the Alban territory, led by Dictator Marcus Furius Camillus. The Romans won easily, despite their fear in remembering their previous defeat by the Gauls. Many thousands of Gauls were killed in the battle and many were captured in the storming of their camp. The survivors fled, mainly toward Apulia, escaping the Romans by scattering widely, driven by panic and confusion, and continued their flight over a great distance.

The Senate and the plebeians unanimously agreed to award a Triumph to Dictator Camillus.

He had barely completed the military campaign when he returned to an even more severe political struggle back in the City. Despite great resistance, the Dictator and the Senate were forced to accept the tribunes' laws. The elections for the consuls were held against the patricians' wishes, resulting in Lucius Sextius Sextinus Lateranus, a plebeian, being elected as consul – the first of his class to reach that office.

Yet even this did not resolve their disputes. The patricians refused to approve the election and it led to the threat of the plebeians seceding, among other serious civil conflicts. However, the Dictator intervened and managed to negotiate a compromise. The patricians agreed to the plebeian consul, and the plebeians agreed to elect one praetor from the patricians to administer justice in the City.

After a long period of hostility, harmony was finally restored between the different orders. The Senate decided that this was a fitting occasion to honor the immortal gods, who deserved it, now more than ever, and to celebrate this by holding the Great Games for the immortal gods, voting to add an extra day to the three already planned. When the plebeian aediles refused the extra burden, young patricians shouted out that they would do it gladly as an honor to the immortal gods. The entire people united in thanks to them. The Senate then passed a decree that the Dictator should ask the people to hold a popular election for two aediles from the patricians and that the Senate should ratify all the elections held that year.