**1.35** King Ancus reigned for twenty-four years, matching the previous kings in both war and peace, and in skill and glory.

Upon his death, Ancus' sons were almost teenagers, which made Tarquin nervous and eager to hold an election for a king as soon as possible. When the election assembly was finally announced, and since he was their guardian, Tarquin sent Ancus' sons away on a hunting trip at the appointed time.

Sources say that Tarquin was one of the first to campaign actively for the crown, making an impassioned speech to win the support of the people, the plebeians. He told the people he wasn't doing anything new, as he wasn't the first foreigner to want to be king of Rome, which anyone might be indignant or surprised at. In fact, he was the third foreigner seeking kingship. Titus Tatius, who was not only a foreigner but a Sabine enemy, had been made king together with Romulus. Numa, who wasn't familiar with the City, and wasn't seeking to be king, had been invited to the throne.

And he himself, he explained, had moved to Rome with his wife, his wealth, and all of his belongings and had spent more time in Rome than in his homeland of Tarquinii. He had learned the Roman laws and customs in both peace and war while serving under King Ancus. And he had been loyal and devoted to the king and had rivaled Ancus himself in generosity to others.

As Tarquin spoke to the people, they believed his words to be true and elected him king by a large majority.

Though he was still a good man, King Tarquin remained ambitious for power. He wanted to strengthen his power as he was strengthening the power of the state, so he added a hundred loyal people to the Senate, who were then called the Lesser Houses of Patricians \[Minorum Gentium\]. These people fervently supported the king because he had helped them get into the Senate.

Tarquin's first war was with the Latins, and he took the town of Apiolae by storm. He brought back more spoils than expected and used them to celebrate with games that were more expensive and grander than the previous kings' games.

He marked out the place for the circus, now called Circus Maximus. Specific seating areas inside were then reserved for the senators and cavalrymen where each group could set up their own viewing area the way they wanted. These areas became known as fori. They were on elevated wooden platforms, twelve feet high, and supported by forked beams. Horse racing and boxing were initially presented, mainly from the Etruscans. Over time, these games became an annual solemn tradition, known variously as the "Roman Games" or the "Great Games."

Tarquin also developed the Roman Forum area marking off spaces for private construction and overseeing the building of covered walkways \[porticoes\] and market stalls.