**1.36** King Tarquin was planning to build a stone wall surrounding the City when a war with the Sabines interrupted his plans. The attack was so sudden that the enemy crossed the Anio River before the Roman army could stop them, causing panic in Rome.

The initial battles were fierce and bloody, with no clear winner. Then, after driving the Sabines back to their camp, the Romans took time to recruit more soldiers and prepare for war. Tarquin believed his army needed more cavalry, so he decided to expand the existing cavalry units, the Ramnes, Tities, and Luceres, which Romulus had established. He wanted to name the new units after himself. This was because Romulus had done this when he was inaugurated.

However, Attus Navius, a famous augur at that time, argued that no changes or additions could be made unless the birds gave a favorable omen, as Romulus had originally created them through augury. Tarquin was enraged and mocked the augur's beliefs. According to legend he decided to test the validity of augury and said, " Come now, diviner, tell me through augury whether it's possible to do what I'm now thinking."

When Attus performed the augury and declared that it could indeed be done, Tarquin revealed his thought:

"I had in mind for you to cut a whetstone in half with a razor. Now take these and do what your birds say is possible." Without hesitation, Attus Navius took a razor and split the whetstone in two.

A statue of Attus Navius, with his head covered, was placed on the steps to the left of the Curia at the exact spot where this event occurred. The split whetstone was also kept there as a monument of this miracle for posterity.

The event greatly increased the respect for augury and the priesthood of the augurs. From that point on, no private or public affairs, whether war or peace, were conducted without augury. Assemblies of the people, military mobilizations, and major decisions of state were all subject to the approval of the birds.

Nor did Tarquin change anything about the centuries of cavalry except doubling their size to eighteen hundred in three centuries. The new additions were called the posteriores \[back ranks\], but they kept the same names as the original units. Today, with the additions, they're referred to as the Six Centuries because the original three were doubled.