**8.31** Fabius immediately convened a meeting and pleaded with the soldiers to defend him with the same courage they had used to defend the Republic from its most dangerous enemies, he who had led them and under whose auspices they had won, from the lawless cruelty of Dictator Papirius. He told them that the Dictator was coming, crazed with envy at the bravery and success of another man. It enraged him that the Republic's affairs had been carried on splendidly in his absence and that if he could alter the outcome of the battle, he would have rather seen the Samnites victorious than the Romans.

Papirius claimed that his authority had been scorned, said Fabius, as though he hadn't forbidden fighting with the exact same jealousy that now fueled his resentment at the battle's success! Even before, out of envy, he wanted to restrain another man's valor and planned to strip the most willing of soldiers of their arms, so that they couldn't fight effectively in his absence. And now he raged and was tormented by the fact that, even without him, the soldiers were neither unarmed nor helpless because they had been led by Quintus Fabius as their Master of the Horse, not the Dictator's mere servant.

"What would he have done," Fabius asked, "if, as can happen in war through chance and the god Mars, we had been defeated? When now, with the enemy conquered and the Republic so well served – well enough that he could not have done better – he threatens punishment for the victorious master of horse?"

The Dictator would be no more hostile to the Master of the Horse than he would be to the military tribunes, the centurions, and the soldiers themselves. If he could, he would unleash his fury on all, and because he can't, he takes it out on one man alone.

Fabius declared that the Dictator's jealousy, like fire, rises upward and targets the top and so he attacks the leader, the head of the operation. If Papirius succeeded in destroying him along with the glory of the victory, then, as if ruling over a conquered army, he would, like a victor,  dare to do to the soldiers whatever he had been allowed to do to their commander.

Therefore, Fabius urged the soldiers to stand up for his cause as it was also their cause and a defense of freedom for all. If the Dictator saw the same unity among the troops in defending their victory just as they had shown in the battle, and that the safety of one soldier was the concern of all, it might soften his attitude towards mercy.

Finally, Fabius said that he was entrusting his life and fortune to their loyalty and bravery.