**8.32** His speech was met with loud cheers from all corners of the assembly, telling him to have courage; no one would do him harm so long as the Roman legions were safe. 

Shortly after, the Dictator Papirius arrived and immediately called for an assembly with a trumpet blast. Once silence fell, a herald summoned the Master of the Horse.

As Fabius approached the tribunal from the lower ground, the Dictator began to speak:

"Quintus Fabius," he said, "I ask you this, when the Dictator's authority is recognized as supreme, and even the consuls who hold royal power, and the praetors, who are created under the same auspices as the consuls, are subject to his command, do you think it's fair that the Master of the Horse shouldn't listen to what the Dictator has said?"

"I ask you, also, Quintus Fabius – knowing that I left home under uncertain auspices, should I have risked the safety of the Republic while the omens were unclear? Or, should the auspices have been taken again so that nothing would be done while the gods' will remained uncertain? When a religious concern is so significant that it prevents the Dictator from acting, should the Master of the Horse be exempt from it and be free to act?"

"But why do I ask these questions, when, even if I left without giving any orders at all, your own judgment should have known what my intentions were?"

"I ordered you not to take any action in my absence and forbade you to engage in battle with the enemy. Yet, in defiance of my orders, while the auspices were uncertain, in violation of military tradition, against the discipline of our ancestors, and against the will of the gods, you dared to fight."

"Answer the questions I have asked. Don't you dare speak about anything else. Lictor, stand by him!"

Fabius found it difficult to respond to each of these points. At times, he protested against the same person acting as accuser and judge in a case that threatened his very existence. At other times, he declared that his life might be taken, but his glory could not, defending himself and accusing the Dictator in turn.

Papirius' anger flared up again, and he ordered the Master of the Horse to be stripped and the rods and axes to be prepared. Fabius, pleading for the soldiers' protection, retreated toward the Triarii as the lictors tore at his clothes. An uproar spread throughout the crowd. Some people begged for mercy. Others threatened rebellion. Those standing closest to the tribunal, who could easily be identified under the Dictator's gaze, pleaded with him to spare the Master of the Horse and not to condemn the entire army through him.

In the back of the assembly, the crowd gathered around Fabius and criticized the Dictator's ruthlessness, to the verge of sedition. Even the tribunal was not entirely calm.

The legates surrounding the Dictator urged him to postpone the matter until another day, to give his anger time to cool and to allow for reflection. Fabius' indiscretion, they argued, had been adequately chastised; his victory had been sufficiently tarnished. Don't resort to the extreme severity of execution, nor disgrace a young man of exceptional merit, nor his father, a man of great renown, nor the entire Fabii family.

When their pleas and arguments had little effect on the Dictator, they then asked him to take note of the furious assembly. It was not appropriate for a man of the Dictator's age and wisdom to further inflame the soldiers' tempers when they were already so enraged, providing fuel for rebellion. No one would blame Quintus Fabius, they said, who was merely seeking to avoid punishment, but they would blame the Dictator, if he allowed his anger to blind him and provoked the crowd's wrath through a poorly-judged confrontation.

Finally, his legates argued, lest he think that they were acting out of concern for Quintus Fabius, they were prepared to swear an oath that, in their opinion, it was not in the Republic's best interest to punish Quintus Fabius at that time.

