**8.38** The next year, Quintus Fabius and Lucius Fulvius were made consuls.

It was rumored that the a new army was being formed by the Samnites. This time, it was comprised of youth who had been hired, for a price, from the Samnites' neighbors. Aulus Cornelius Arvina was appointed Dictator and Marcus Fabius Ambustus was made Master of the Horse. A vigorous draft was held with more severity than usual and a powerful army was assembled to fight the Samnites.

Despite being in enemy territory, the Roman camp was set up carelessly, as if the enemy was far away. Suddenly, the Samnite legions approached boldly and with such ferocity that they built their rampart right up to the Roman outpost. Nightfall prevented them from attacking the fortifications immediately, but they made it clear they intended to attack at dawn. 

Dictator Cornelius, seeing that the battle would happen sooner that he expected, worried that the courage of the troops would be lessened by their position. He had them build numerous fires to frustrate the sight of the enemy and silently led the legions away. However, due to the close proximity of the camps, the Samnites noticed their departure. 

The Samnite cavalry immediately pursued the Roman column insisting on a battle but refrained from attacking until daylight. Their infantry didn't leave their camp until dawn. As soon as day broke, the Samnite cavalry dared to attack the Roman's rear, harassing the last ranks and blocking the route in difficult terrain delaying the Roman march.

Meanwhile, the Samnite infantry caught up with their cavalry, and the entire Samnite force pursued the Romans closely.

The Dictator realized he couldn't continue without great danger, and ordered the very place where he stood to be enclosed in and a camp to be set up. However, with the enemy's horsemen surrounding them on all sides, it was impossible to start construction of a rampart. Seeing that he could neither move forward nor stay put, he prepared his troops for battle, moving the baggage train out of the line. The enemy also formed their line, matching the Romans in spirit and strength.

The Samnites' courage was boosted by their ignorance of the Romans' reason for retreating: unfavorable terrain. They believed the Romans feared them, and they were chasing a fleeing enemy. This belief kept the battle evenly matched for a long time.

The Samnites had long since become accustomed to the shouts of the Roman army, and, by Hercules, they held their ground from the third to the eighth hour of the day. It's said that the battle was so uncertain that neither the shout, which had been raised once by the first rush, had been repeated. Nor had the standards advanced or retreated from their place. Nor was there any retreat from either side. They fought relentlessly, each man in his place, pushing against their opponents with their shields. They fought without pause or looking back. The steady din and monotony of the battle remained constant, indicating that the outcome would be determined by exhaustion or nightfall.

Eventually, the soldiers were drained; their swords were ineffective, and their leaders were out of strategies. Suddenly, the Samnite cavalry, having learned from a single troop that had advanced beyond the rest, that the Roman baggage train was left unguarded and far from their army, left the battle to retrieve it.

The Dictator, informed by a messenger what was happening with the baggage, said, "Let them burden themselves with as much spoils as they can." More messengers arrived, reporting that the Samnites were looting and carrying off the soldiers' belongings.

The Dictator then called the Master of the Horse and said, "Notice, Marcus Fabius, that the enemy's cavalry has abandoned the fight? They're entangled and burdened with our baggage. Attack them now, as always happens to an army distracted by looting, while they're scattered; you'll find few on horseback, and fewer with weapons in hand. As they're loading their horses with spoils, slaughter them while they're unarmed, and return to them their bloody spoils. I'll take care of the legions and the infantry battle: the honor that the cavalry will earn is yours."