**5.35** After some time, another group, the Cenomani, followed the path of the previous group. They were led by Etitovius and crossed the Alps through the same forest with the help of Bellovesus, settling in the area where the cities of Brixia and Verona are now located. After them, the Libui and the Saluvii settled near the ancient nation of the Ligurians known as Laevi, along the banks of the Ticino River. Then, the Boii and Lingonians crossed the Alps through the Poenine Pass and, finding the area between the Po River and the Alps occupied, crossed the Po River on rafts. They drove the Etruscans and Umbrians out of the countryside, but they stayed within the Apennines. The Senonians, the last of these migrants, claimed the land from the Utis River to the Aesis River. It's believed that this group was the one that went to Clusium and then to Rome, although it isn't clear whether they were alone or supported by the peoples of the Cisalpine Gauls.

The people of Clusium, frightened by such an unfamiliar enemy with their large numbers, unusual appearance, and unique weapons, and hearing that the Etruscan forces had been repeatedly defeated by them on both sides of the Po, sent ambassadors to Rome to ask for help from the Senate. Clusium had no relationship with the Roman people, either in terms of alliance or friendship, except that they chose not to defend their kinsmen, the Veientes, against the Romans.

They received no help. Instead, three ambassadors, the sons of Marcus Fabius Ambustus, were sent to negotiate with the Gauls on behalf of the Senate and the Roman people. They asked the Gauls not to attack the allies and friends of the Romans, who had done them no harm. The Romans would support their allies, with military force, if necessary, but they preferred to avoid war if at all possible. They wanted to get to know the Gauls, a new nation unfamiliar to them, through peace rather than through war.