**4.35** The next year saw Aulus Sempronius Atratinus, Lucius Quinctius Cincinnatus, Lucius Furius Medullinus, and Lucius Horatius Barbatus serving as consular tribunes.

A twenty-year truce was granted to the Veientes, and a three-year truce to the Aequians, even though they had requested a longer one.

The city was also free from political unrest.

The consular tribunes were Appius Claudius Crassus, Spurius Nautilus Rutilus, Lucius Sergius Fidenas, and Sextus Julius Iulus.

This year, while not marked by foreign wars or unrest at home, was made notable by the Great Games that had been promised seven years previously during the war. The famous spectacle was magnificently presented by the military tribunes with a large attendance of neighboring states. The visitors publicly agreed that the event was made even more enjoyable for them by the hospitality of their hosts.

After the Great Games, the plebeian tribunes gave speeches criticizing the plebeians. They said that the plebeians were so awestruck by those they despised that they remained in perpetual servitude. Not only did the plebeians not have the courage to hope for a share in the consulship, but also, they did not even consider themselves or their fellow plebeians during the election of consular tribunes even though the election was open to both patricians and plebeians.

They argued that plebeians shouldn't be surprised that no one was looking out for their interests. Plebeians work hard with the expectation of honor and reward. They would try anything if the rewards reflected the size of the effort. But why should a plebeian tribune take great risks, rushing blindly into conflicts with no profit, knowing that the patricians he opposes will persecute him relentlessly, and he wouldn't be any more honored or appreciated by the plebeians he defended. Under such conditions, he should neither hope, nor demand to be honored. Great honors inspire great courage. Plebeians will be respected when plebeians start to respect themselves.

The plebeian tribunes suggested that it should be tested whether any plebeian could handle a high position, or whether it was almost miraculous for a plebeian to be brave and hardworking. It had taken a lot of effort to allow consular tribunes to be chosen from the plebeians. They had asked for men respected at home and in the army and good candidates had run for these positions, but they had been mocked, rejected, and ridiculed by the patricians in the first few years. Eventually, the plebeians stopped putting themselves in positions where they could be insulted.

The plebeian tribunes suggested that the law allowing the plebeians to run for office could be repealed, since it was legal but never actually happened. It would be less shameful to have a law that was clearly unfair than for them to be passed over in elections, as if they were unworthy to hold office.