**4.37** Gaius Sempronius Atratinus and Quintus Fabius Vibulanus were chosen as consuls.

An event in a foreign land worth remembering occurred that year. The city of Vulturnum, belonging to the Etruscans and now known as Capua, was captured by the Samnites. The city was named Capua either after their leader, Capys, or more likely, due to its flat lands. The Samnites took over after being received as allies and admitted into the city and its lands, because the Etruscans were weary of war. Then, on a festival day, while the old inhabitants were heavy with sleep and feasting, the new settlers, the Samnites, fell upon them in a nighttime massacre.

After these events, the new consuls whom we mentioned took office on the thirteenth of December. Intelligence reports about an impending Volscian war were coming in not only by those who were sent for that purpose, but also by ambassadors from the Latin and Hernician allies. They all said the same thing: the Volscians were more focused than ever on choosing generals and raising an army. There was murmuring among the people that the Volscians should either abandon arms and war forever and accept slavery, or surpass those they competed with for supremacy in bravery, persistence, and military discipline.

The reports weren't baseless, not only was the Senate not overly concerned, but Consul Sempronius, who was assigned the province by lot, acted rashly and carelessly, relying on luck as if it were the most constant thing in the world. As the leader of a victorious state against a frequently defeated one, he believed that success was guaranteed. Accordingly, even the Volscian army was more disciplined than the Roman one.

Thus, as often happens, luck follows virtue. In the first battle, Sempronius acted without planning or forethought. The Romans fought without strengthening their columns with reserves nor did they properly position their cavalry. The war cries were the first sign that things weren't going well. The Volscians' shout was animated and more sustained. The Romans' shout was intermittent, uneven, and weak, revealing their low morale. It betrayed the terror in their hearts.

The Volscians, emboldened by this, pushed forward with their shields and their swords flashing in the sun. On the Roman side, helmets wavered as the men looked around nervously, unsure of themselves, and they crowded together for mutual protection. At one point the Roman standards were abandoned by the front ranks and the next moment they were taken back among their respective maniples. There was no outright flight, but neither was there any victory. The Romans would rather have taken cover than fight. The Volscian standards pushed against the Roman line, forcing the battle, which saw more Romans killed than fleeing.