**4.42** The plebeians elected Sextus Tempanius, Marcus Asellius, Tiberius Antistius, and Tiberius Spurillius as plebeian tribunes, even though they weren't present. All of them, on the advice of Tempanius, were selected by the cavalry to act as their centurions.

The Senate, due to the growing dislike for the name of "consuls" because of the hatred toward former consul Sempronius, decided that consular tribunes should be elected. The elected individuals were Lucius Manlius Capitolinus, Quintus Antonius Merenda, and Lucius Papirius Mugillanus.

At the start of the year, Lucius Hortensius, a plebeian tribune, set a trial date for Gaius Sempronius, the consul from the prior year. When his four colleagues pleaded with him in front of the Roman people not to trouble their innocent general, who could only be blamed for his bad luck, Hortensius became offended. He believed they were testing his resolve, and that the accused was relying not on the pleas of the plebeian tribunes, which were done for appearances, but on their veto for protection.

Hortensius then asked Sempronius, "Where is your patrician spirit? Where is the spirit of someone confident with an innocent conscience? Is a man of consular dignity hiding under the protection of the plebeian tribunes!" Hortensius then turned to his fellow tribunes, "What will you do if I continue with the prosecution? Will you take away the plebeians' rights and overthrow the plebeian tribunes' authority?"

The plebeian tribunes responded that the power of the Roman people was supreme. Higher than Gaius Sempronius' power. Higher than anyone else's power. They, the plebeian tribunes, had neither the will nor the power to overturn the plebeians' judgment. However, he was like a father to them, and if their prayers weren't answered, they would change their garments to mourning and stand by his side.

"The plebeians of Rome won't see their tribunes dressed in mourning," Hortensius replied, "I drop all charges. I've nothing more to say to former consul Sempronius, who has been fortunate enough to be loved by his soldiers while in office." The loyalty of the four plebeian tribunes was appreciated by both the plebeians and the patricians, as was Hortensius' willingness to listen to their fair pleas.

The Aequians, who had claimed the uncertain victory of the Volscians as their own, were no longer favored by Fortune.