**4.26** Titus Quinctius Cincinnatus, surnamed Poenus, son of the famous Lucius Quinctius Cincinnatus, and Gnaeus Julius Mento were elected as consuls.

Reports came in from the Hernicians and the Latins, Roman allies, warning of an outbreak of hostilities by the Aequians and Volscians. The threat of war was imminent. A draft was held under the Lex Sacrata, the sacred oath which was the most powerful tool they had to force men into service.

Large armies were assembled on both sides and met at Algidum. The Aequians and Volscians set up their camps independently, taking extra precautions this time to fortify their camps and drill their soldiers. This caused even more fear in Rome.

The Senate wanted a dictator appointed. Despite many previous victories over these two nations, the enemies were now heading down the path of war with renewed energy while Rome was weak from having lost so many young Romans to the epidemic. Above all, people feared the consuls' wickedness, their constant disagreements over everything, and their inability to plan what needed to be done. Other sources say that the consuls fought badly at Algidum, and this was the reason for the call for a dictator.

It's said that the consuls, despite their differences, united together against appointing a dictator, contrary to the will of the Senate. Alarming reports about the enemy continued to come in and the consuls still refused to submit to the Senate. Quintus Servilius Priscus, a former dictator and a highly respected figure, stepped forward, saying, "Plebeian tribunes, since the situation has come to such a dangerous point, the Senate appeals to you to use your power and force the consuls to name a dictator in such a crisis of the Republic." When they heard this, the plebeian tribunes saw this as an opportunity to increase their power. They withdrew for a discussion, and then, speaking on behalf of the college of tribunes, declared that the consuls should obey the Senate. If they continued to resist the will of that most distinguished body, the tribunes would order them to be imprisoned.

The consuls preferred to be defeated by the plebeian tribunes than defeated by the Senate. The patricians were undermining the highest office and subjecting the consuls to the power of the plebeian tribunes. If a plebeian tribune could overrule a consul and even send him to prison, then what power does the Senate have? No one could agree on who should nominate the dictator. They all drew lots and the task of nominating a dictator fell to Titus Quinctius.

Quinctius chose Aulus Postumius Tubertus, his father-in-law, known as a strict commander, as Dictator. Lucius Julius Iullus was appointed Master of the Horse.

A draft was immediately called. All civil business was suspended, and the City focused solely on war preparations. The investigation of claims for exemption from military service was postponed until the end of the war, so, even in doubtful cases, men preferred to enlist. The Hernicians and Latins were also ordered to provide soldiers; both groups eagerly obeyed the commands of the Dictator.