**4.27** All these actions were carried out swiftly. Consul Gnaeus Julius was left to protect the city, while Lucius Julius Iullus, Master of the Horse, handled any sudden demands of war so that nothing the army needed in camp would be delayed. As the situation was such a serious one, Dictator Postumius, echoing the ritual words of Aulus Cornelius, the Pontifex Maximus, who vowed to hold Great Games if they were victorious.

After leaving the City, he split his army into two divisions, giving one to Consul Quinctius. Soon afterward, the Dictator advanced toward the enemy's position.

As they noticed the enemy had set up independent camps not far from each other, the Romans also set up two separate camps, about a mile away. Dictator Postumius was nearer to Tusculum, and Consul Quinctius was nearer to Lanuvium. There were now four armies and just as many fortifications, with a plain between them that was large enough for skirmishes or lining up both armies for battle.

From the time the camps were set up close to the enemy, there was constant light skirmishing. Dictator Postumius allowed his soldiers to test the waters with these minor skirmishes not only to compare their strength, but to whet their appetite for a decisive and final victory.

The enemy, having abandoned all hope of a regular battle, decided to stake everything on a nighttime surprise attack of Consul Quinctius' camp. The sudden shout woke up not only the consuls and the guards, but also the entire army, and even woke the Dictator from sleep. Everything depended on instant action. Consul Quinctius showed equal courage and coolness. Some of his troops reinforced the guards at the gates, while others formed a ring around the rampart.

As the Dictator's camp wasn't attacked, there was less confusion. It was easier to see what needed to be done. Dictator Postumius quickly sent reinforcements to Consul Quinctius' camp, appointing Spurius Postumius Albus as legate to lead. The Dictator, himself, with part of his forces, set out on a small detour to a place hidden away from the actual fighting where he could suddenly strike the enemy from the rear. He left Quintus Sulpicius, the legate, in charge of the camp, and assigned the cavalry to Marcus Fabius, another legate, ordering him not to move the cavalry before daylight, as it would be difficult to maneuver in the dark.

The Dictator carried out all the measures that any other wise and experienced general could order and execute. One example where he showed extraordinary judgment and bravery, deserving of high praise, was when he sent Marcus Geganius with a special chosen group of cohorts to strike the enemy's camp, which had been previously scouted out, finding that the enemy had left with most of their troops. When Geganius stormed the camp, he discovered the defenders were so focused on the danger of their comrades that they were careless about protecting themselves. They even neglected their outpost and guard stations. Geganius took their camp almost before the enemy realized it was under attack. Then, when the Dictator saw the smoke signal as agreed, he shouted out that the enemy's camp was taken and ordered the news to be spread everywhere.