**4.29** Vettius Messius, along with a group of the bravest young men, charged over the bodies of slain Romans and led them back to the Volscians' camp, which hadn't yet been captured. The rest of his army followed.

Consul Quinctius pursued the scattered men as far as the rampart, then attacked the camp and the rampart itself. The Dictator also brought up his forces from the other side. The attack on the camp was just as furious as the battle had been.

At this point, the Consul threw a standard within the rampart into the camp to encourage his soldiers to move forward more fiercely in the charge to breach it. The standard was able to be recovered when the first breakthrough was made. At this point, the Dictator's forces had also breached the rampart, bringing the battle into the camp. When the enemy saw this happening, they started to drop their weapons and surrender.

Finally, the camp was captured. All the enemies were sold into slavery, except for their senators. Some of the loot was returned to the Latins and Hernicians when they claimed their property. The Dictator sold the rest at auction.

Then, leaving Consul Quinctius in charge of the camp, Dictator Postumius left for Rome. He entered the city in Triumph and subsequently resigned his dictatorship.

Some historians cast a shadow over the memory of this glorious dictatorship by claiming that his son, despite being victorious, was beheaded by the Dictator because he had left his post without permission to take advantage of a favorable fighting opportunity. I don't believe this, and the differing opinions on the matter support my skepticism. An argument against this claim is that such orders have been called "Manlian," not "Postumian," suggesting that the person who first established such a brutal precedent would likely be given the notorious title of cruelty. Moreover, the nickname "Imperiosus", meaning "domineering", was given to Manlius. Postumius hasn't been marked by any hateful label.

Consul Gnaeus Julius dedicated the Temple of Apollo in the absence of his colleague, without casting lots. Consul Quinctius, feeling slighted, complained about this in the Senate after he disbanded his army and returned to the City, but to no avail.

In addition to the year's significant achievements, an event occurred that seemed unrelated to Rome's interests. The Carthaginians, who were destined to become formidable enemies, transported an army into Sicily for the first time to assist one of the factions during some domestic quarrels among the Sicilians.