**6.2** The citizens did not have much time to plan the rebuilding of the City after such a devastating defeat. Rome's old adversaries, the Volscians, had taken up arms, intending to wipe out the Roman name. Then, traders reported a hostile league forming among leaders from the Etruscan states after a meeting at the Temple of Voltumna. Lastly, the defection of the Latins and the Hernician allies added a new layer of fear. After the battle at Lake Regillus, these allies had, for almost a hundred years, never wavered in their faith in the friendship of the Roman people. With these threats looming from all sides, it became clear to everyone that the Roman name wasn't only hated by their enemies, it was also held in contempt by its own allies.

It was decided that the republic should be defended under the same leadership that had recovered it, and Marcus Furius Camillus was nominated as dictator. As Dictator, he appointed Gaius Servilius Ahala as Master of the Horse. Camillus then suspended all public business and held a draft of the younger men in such a way that even the older men, who still had some strength remaining, were organized into centuries and sworn to his allegiance. He divided the newly drafted and armed army into three parts. One part led by Lucius Aemilius was stationed in Veiian territory, facing the Etruscans.  The second part led by Aulus Manlius was ordered to protect the City; he set up camp just outside the City. Dictator Camillus himself led the third part against the Volscians. Near Lanuvium, at a place called Maecium, he attacked their camp.

The Volscians had gone to war out of contempt, believing that nearly all the Roman youth had been wiped out by the Gauls. They were terrified when they learned that Camillus had been appointed to command. They were so unnerved that they surrounded their camp with a rampart, barricading it with trees so that the Romans couldn't penetrate their defenses. When Camillus saw this, he ordered fire to be thrown onto the barricade of trees. A strong wind blew the fire towards the enemy, not only opening a passage but also causing chaos in the enemy camp with the heat and the smoke and the crackling of the burning green timber. The Romans had less difficulty entering the Volscian camp by way of the rampart which was defended by the Volscians and more difficulty climbing over the burned barrier. After routing and slaughtering the enemy, Camillus allowed the soldiers to keep the spoils, which was a pleasant surprise as he wasn't known for his generosity.

He then pursued the fleeing Volscians, laying waste to all the Volscian territory. It was then, at last, that the Volscians were forced to surrender in the seventieth year of being at war with the Romans.  After his victory over the Volscians, Camillus moved on to the Aequians, who were also preparing for war. He caught the Aequian army off guard at Bolae and took not only their camp but also the city in the first attack.