**6.7** When civil activities were suspended and a draft had been held, Camillus and Valerius journeyed to Satricum. 

There, the Antians had gathered not only the young Volscians of Antium from the new generation (after a resounding defeat three years before), but also large numbers of Latins and Hernicians from states that were in excellent health due to a long period of peace. The addition of this new enemy to the old ones unsettled the Roman soldiers. The centurions reported to Camillus, as he was arranging his battle line, saying that the soldier morale was unstable. They were reluctant to take up arms and, once they did, they left the camp with resistance and hesitation. Some even voiced concerns that they would each have to fight a hundred enemies and that such numbers, even if unarmed, would be hard to resist.

Jumping on his horse, Camillus rode up and down along the ranks in front of the standards, addressing his soldiers:

"Why are you so deflated, men? Why the reluctance? Are you unfamiliar with the enemy, or with me, or with yourselves? The enemy is nothing more than the usual target of your bravery and glory. Under my command, without even mentioning the capture of Falerii and Veii and the legions of Gauls who were slaughtered in their captured homeland, you just recently celebrated a triple Triumph for the three victories over these very same Volscians, Aequians, and Etruscans. Perhaps you don't you recognize me as your general because I gave you the signal not as a dictator, but as a consular tribune? I don't wish to have the highest authority over you, and you should see nothing in me but who I am. The dictatorship didn't increase my courage, nor did being in exile diminish it."

"We're all the same individuals, and since we bring the same resources to this war as we brought to previous wars, we should expect the same outcome. Once you charge together, each of you will do what you have learned and are accustomed to doing. You'll conquer; they'll flee."