**6.9** Camillus now focused on a higher goal, Antium, which was the Volscian capital and the primary cause of the last war. However, because Antium was a fortified city, it couldn't be captured without significant preparations, such as large siege equipment and catapults. 

Leaving his colleague with the army, Camillus went to Rome to urge the Senate to destroy Antium. While speaking – I believe it may have been divine will for Antium to stay for a little longer – ambassadors from Nepete and Sutrium arrived, asking for help against the Etruscans as the window for providing aid to them was closing. Thus, Fortune diverted Camillus' energies from Antium.

Nepete and Sutrium were on the borders of Etruscan territory, and they served as barriers or gateways for that region. The Etruscans wanted to take them for strategic reasons and, similarly, the towns aimed to recover or protect them for the Romans. Regardless, both the Etruscans and the Romans wanted to control these areas. The Senate decided to negotiate with Camillus to abandon Antium and focus on the Etruscan war.

The City troops, which Quinctius had commanded, were then assigned to Camillus. Although he would have preferred the experienced army in Volscian territory accustomed to his command, he didn't object. He only requested that Valerius was his co-commander. Quinctius and Horatius were sent to fight the Volscians, replacing Valerius.

Camillus and Valerius, now arriving at Sutrium, found part of the town already captured by the Etruscans. In the other part, the townspeople had blocked the roads and were barely holding off the enemy's attack. The arrival of help from Rome, as well as the respected name of the Camillus, whose name was famous among both enemies and allies, gave them hope and bought them time.

Camillus divided the army, ordering Valerius to lead his forces around to parts of the city which the enemy held and attack the walls. This wasn't so much in the hope of capturing the city by the ladders, but to distract the enemy and give the townspeople, already exhausted from fighting, time to rest. It also allowed him to enter the city without a fight.

Once the Etruscans realized that not only were the walls on both sides of the city being attacked, but that the Romans were now inside the city, they fled. In a panic, they tried to crowd through an unguarded gate in a single column and were cut down. While some soldiers were killed in the fields, the majority were killed within the city walls by Camillus' troops. Valerius' troops focused on pursuing fleeing soldiers, and they didn't stop killing until nightfall. After recapturing Sutrium and returning it to the allies, the army moved to Nepete, which had already surrendered, and was now entirely in the possession of the Etruscans.