**2.25** The Volscians were still under the impression that there was severe disagreement among the Romans. The next night, they tried to infiltrate the Romans' camp, hoping that the darkness would encourage desertions and betrayals. However, the guards on duty spotted them. The army was alerted and, upon receiving the alarm, the soldiers rushed to their arms. This thwarted the Volscians' plan and both armies spent the rest of the night sleeping.

At dawn, the Volscians filled the trenches and launched an attack on the rampart. As fortifications were being torn down from all sides, Consul Servilius waited to give the signal despite the cries from all around. The debtors were especially hungry for battle. He held back to gauge the soldiers' morale. When their eagerness for battle was evident, he finally gave the signal to charge. The soldiers, wild for battle, let loose on the enemy, defeating them at the very first charge.

As the enemy retreated, they were pursued for as long as the Roman infantry could keep up. The cavalry then took over, driving them in panic all the way back to their camp. As the Roman legions continued to arrive and surround the enemy camp, the Volscians abandoned it and fled. Once the camp was surrounded, the Romans captured and looted it. The next day, the legions were led to Suessa Pometia, where the enemy had retreated. The town was captured within a few days and was handed over to the soldiers for plunder. This provided some relief to the impoverished soldiers.

Consul Servilius, with great honor, led his victorious army back to Rome. As they were leaving for Rome, representatives from the Volscians at Ecetra approached him. They were fearful for their fate after the capture of Pometia and came to seek peace. The Senate granted them peace, but some of their land was confiscated.