**1.1** First, to begin, it's widely accepted among us that after Troy was captured, the other Trojans were cruelly punished by the Greeks aside from two Trojan leaders, Aeneas and Antenor. These men were spared because of their longstanding ties of hospitality with the Greeks and their constant push for peace and the return of Helen. However, the fortunes of each man were different.

Sailing to the deepest part of the Adriatic Sea, Antenor joined up with a group of Eneti who had been driven out of Paphlagonia by a rebellion and were seeking a new leader, as their king, Pylaemenes, was killed at Troy. Together, they drove out the Euganei who lived between the Adriatic Sea and the Alps, and then took over their land. That place was then called Troy, and that name eventually extended to the region. However, the people were generally called the Veneti.

Aeneas, like Antenor, also fled from his homeland, though Fate had prepared a far greater destiny for him. First, he went to Macedonia, then to Sicily, and then to the Laurentine territory. Here, the Trojans disembarked, and here, too, they called the land Troy.

The journey had left the Trojans with nothing but their weapons and their ships, so they began to plunder the land for food. King Latinus and the native inhabitants who were already living there became alarmed watching them steal from their land, so they began arming themselves to fight off the violent newcomers.

There are two versions of what happened next. Some say that after losing a battle, Latinus made peace and then an alliance with Aeneas. Others say that as the battle lines formed, before the signal to attack was given, Latinus stepped between the armies and asked to speak with the leader of the newcomers. He asked who they were, where they came from, why they had left their home, and what they were looking for in the Laurentine territory. When King Latinus learned that they were Trojans led by Aeneas, the son of Anchises and the Greek goddess Aphrodite, and that they were looking for a new place to settle and build a city after their homeland was destroyed, he marveled at the people, their leader, and their spirit of being ready for war or peace. Latinus offered his right hand and pledged his good faith for a future friendship. A treaty was then made between the leaders, and the armies saluted each other.

King Latinus welcomed Aeneas as a guest in his house. Before the household gods, Latinus then added a private treaty to the public one, offering Aeneas the hand of his daughter, Lavinia, in marriage. This gave the Trojans hope that they could finally settle down permanently. They built a town, which Aeneas named Lavinium in honor of his new wife. Soon, Aeneas and Lavinia had a male heir, whom they named Ascanius.