**1.52** Tarquinius called the Latins back to a meeting, praising those who had caught and punished Turnus for trying to stir up a revolution as having correctly punished him for treason. He then spoke:

"It's well within my rights to use a long-established treaty to rule the Latins. All Latins come from Alba. This means you were once part of the treaty that made Alba and its colonies part of Rome under King Tullus. I think it's better for everyone involved if we renew that treaty. I want the Latins to share in Rome's success instead of constantly fearing or suffering the destruction of their cities and the devastation of their lands, as they did under King Ancus and, again, under my own father."

Even though the treaty favored Rome, the Latins didn't need much persuasion to agree with the King. They knew that Latin leadership generally agreed with the King, and they also saw what had happened to Turnus when someone dared step out of line to oppose him. The treaty was renewed.

An order was then given that Latin men of military age should be present in large numbers, armed, and at the Ferentina Grove on a certain day, as the treaty required. When they gathered from all the states at the Roman king's command, Tarquinius mixed both Latin and Roman soldiers together. He did this strategically so they wouldn't have their own leader, separate orders, or their own standards. He created new maniples by combining the existing Roman and Latin units into one, such that these new maniples would be mixed from the beginning. Then, he put centurions in charge of the newly doubled maniples.