**1.54** Sextus was allowed to join the public meetings in Gabii. Although he said he would follow the advice of Gabii's older residents on most issues, he was a firm supporter of renewing the war. He claimed to know more about the topic because he understood the strengths of both nations as well as, internally, how unbearable the King's arrogance was to his people and his own children.

Gradually, Sextus convinced Gabii's leading men to renew the war against Rome. He led the most energetic young men on raids and military expeditions backing up his words with actions that were designed to deceive. His false reputation for loyalty grew and was believed by the soldiers. Eventually, he was chosen as the war's main leader.

During the war, the people didn't fully understand what was happening. There were several small battles with the Romans, and the Gabians usually won. Everyone in Gabii, from the richest to the poorest, came to believe that Sextus Tarquinius was their leader sent as a gift from the gods. He put himself in danger, endured the fatigues of war along with everyone else, and was generous in distributing the plunder among the people. His bravery and generosity made him so popular with the soldiers that he had more power in Gabii than Tarquinius Superbus, his father, had in Rome.

When he felt he had enough support from the Gabians, Sextus sent a trusted messenger to Rome to ask his father for advice as to what to do next, now that the gods had given him free reign in Gabii. King Tarquinius wasn't sure whether to trust this messenger and didn't answer verbally. Instead, he walked around the garden with the messenger and knocked the heads off the tallest poppies with his staff. The messenger, tired of asking questions and waiting for an answer, thinking that he wasn't going to receive an answer, returned to Gabii and reported what he had said and what he had seen: that the king, whether from anger, or hatred, or from arrogance, true to his nature, had not uttered a word. But Sextus understood his father's silent message: he should eliminate Gabii's most influential men.

Sextus started spreading false accusations about some of the leading men of the city before the people. Some men were publicly executed on these false charges, and others whom the public accusations were less convincing were secretly killed. Some escaped by fleeing. Some were driven into exile and the property of both the absent and the executed was confiscated and distributed. Then gifts and spoils were also given out and the people were so distracted by being enriched from these benefits that they didn't notice the damage being done to their city. In time, having been stripped of its leadership and unable to help themselves or appeal to others for help, Gabii was handed over to Tarquinius without any resistance.