**1.55** Having taken control of Gabii, Tarquinius made peace with the Aequi people and renewed the treaty with the Etruscans. He then focused on the City's affairs. His main project now was constructing the Temple of Jupiter on the Tarpeian Mount, a monument to his name and reign. This temple was a project started by his father, but it would be completed by him.

Tarquinius decided to deconsecrate several small temples and chapels to ensure that the area was solely dedicated to Jupiter and his temple. These temples had been initially vowed by Titus Tatius during his battle with King Romulus and were later consecrated and dedicated. As the construction began, it's said that the gods showed signs of the empire's future greatness. The augural birds approved the deconsecrating of all the temples except for the Temple of Terminus, the god of the boundary stones. It was interpreted to mean that because Terminus wouldn't be removed and would stay within the sacred boundaries of Rome, the empire would be long-lasting and stable.

This auspice of perpetuity was followed by another prodigy, predicting the empire's future greatness; it's said that a man's head, with the face still intact, was uncovered by those who dug the temple's foundation. This was interpreted as a sign that the temple would be the head of the empire and the center of power. The seers in the City interpreted it this way, as well as the Etruscan seers brought in for consultation.

Tarquinius was encouraged by these signs, so he increased the project's budget. However, the money raised from selling the spoils from Pometia, which he originally thought would allow him to complete the work, barely covered the cost of the foundation. This leads me to believe Fabius Pictor, an older historian, who claimed that only forty talents were set aside for the project, rather than Piso, who claimed that forty thousand pounds of silver were allocated for the purpose. The latter amount seems too large for the spoils of one city at that time and more than enough for any building project, even one as large as the foundation of such a massive structure.
