**1.56** However, Tarquinius was determined to finish building the Temple of Jupiter. He used not only public money for this purpose, but also the labor of the plebeians, and he hired Etruscan craftsmen from all over. Although the labor was considerable and added to the military obligations of the plebeians, they preferred building temples for the gods with their own hands. They grew more burdened when they were transferred to other, less glamorous projects that required more effort, like building the seating in the Circus Maximus and constructing the City's great sewer system underground, the Cloaca Maxima. The scale of these projects was so impressive that the renovations made recently in our time, as impressive as they are, don't compare with the original.

Since the plebeians were worn out from their labor, Tarquinius thought having such a large population inside the City was a burden because they were unemployed and had nothing to do. Because he wished to occupy the wider borders of the empire, he sent colonists to two colonies which would serve as protective outposts. The first colony was at Signia, giving the Romans a land-based defense. The second was Circeii, which grew their coastal defense.

While all this was happening, Tarquinius saw a terrifying omen. A snake slithered out of a wooden column, causing panic and flight in the palace when it was reported. The omen didn't panic Tarquinius, but it did make him deeply worried about what would happen in the future.

Accordingly, since only Etruscan oracles were employed for public prodigies, and terrified by this sight, as if it were a personal one, he decided to send people to Delphi, home of the most famous oracle in the world, to understand the omen. However, he didn't entrust the task to messengers, instead sending two of his own sons, Titus and Aruns, on what would be a dangerous journey across unknown lands and still more unknown seas to Greece.

They were joined by Lucius Junius Brutus, son of the king's sister, Tarquinia and Tarquinius' nephew as their companion.

Brutus was actually quite smart but pretended to be stupid for his own safety, as he understood that people who crossed Tarquinius somehow ended up dead. The leading men of the state, among whom was his own brother, had been killed by his uncle. Brutus wanted to be sure that, in his mind, his uncle would have nothing to fear from him, and, among his possessions, his uncle would have nothing to steal. In fact, he even let the king take control of his property and he accepted the nickname Brutus, which means "foolish." He hid his intelligence under this disguise, as there was little protection under the law, and as the future liberator of the Roman people, he waited for the right time to free the Roman people. Taken to Delphi by the Tarquinii as a joke more than a true companion, Brutus brought a gift for Apollo. A golden staff enclosed in a larger hollow one made of cornel wood, or cherry dogwood. This was a clever symbol of the genius of Brutus.

Having arrived and having completed their father's wishes, the brothers then asked the oracle which of Tarquinius' sons would rule Rome. It is said that a voice was heard from the lowest cave with the answer:

"He who kisses his mother first shall be the first among you to have supreme power in Rome." 

The brothers decided to keep this a secret with the utmost care from their other brother, Sextus, who had been left behind in Rome. Sextus would be unaware of the answer and would have no share in the power. They drew lots to decide who would kiss their mother first when they returned. But Brutus interpreted Pythia's words differently. He pretended to fall and kissed the ground, considering it the common mother of all mortals.

After returning to Rome, they found the City preparing for a great war against the Rutulians.