**1.57** The Rutulians, a wealthy nation during that time, controlled the city of Ardea. Their wealth sparked a war because Tarquinius, who had spent all his money on public works, wanted to increase his own wealth and also appease the plebeians by sharing the spoils with them. Beyond their general hatred of his arrogance, the plebeians were now enraged because they had been conscripted to do manual labor for Tarquinius' internal construction projects, work which they saw as fit only for slaves.

The king tried to capture Ardea forcefully; however, when that failed, he blockaded the city. As often happens during long-term operations like a siege, war was slow and the soldiers had a lot of free time, especially the officers, more than the regular soldiers. The young princes would often spend their free time feasting and partying. One day, while they were drinking in the tent of Sextus Tarquinius, Collatinus, son of Egerius, was also there. They started arguing about whose wife was the best. The discussion became absurd as each man made larger and larger boasts about his wife. Collatinus said the discussion was over. His wife was the best. To prove it, they should ride to Rome and in a few hours they could see how much his Lucretia excelled over the others. He said, "If we still have the energy, why not mount our horses and see firsthand what our wives are doing? What each man sees upon our unannounced arrival should be the truest measure of character." Warmed with wine, they all agreed and yelled, "Let's do it!" Calling for their horses, they galloped off toward Rome.

They reached Rome just as the sun began to set and observed the royal daughters-in-law wasting time at banquets and enjoying luxury with their friends. From there, they rode to the town of Collatia, where they found Collatinus' wife, Lucretia. Unlike the other wives, Lucretia was working with her maids, spinning by the light of oil lamps, even though it was late at night. The men agreed that Lucretia was the best wife. Collatinus and the Tarquinii were warmly welcomed. Delighted by his victory, Collatinus invited the young royals to stay. But in that moment Sextus Tarquinius was immediately overcome with lust for Lucretia, wanting to immediately take her by force and rape her. It wasn't only her beauty but her virtue that inflamed him. After their drunken outing, the princes then returned to the camp.