**1.58** A few days later, Sextus secretly revisited the town of Collatia with only one servant. Collatinus was unaware any of this was happening. He returned to Collatinus' home and was warmly welcomed by the unsuspecting hosts. After dinner, he was shown to the guest room. Burning with desire, Sextus waited until it was safe enough and everyone was asleep, then he went to Lucretia as she slept with his sword drawn and pressed his left hand on her breast saying, "Be quiet, Lucretia. I am Sextus Tarquinius; the sword is in my hand and you will die if you utter a word.". Lucretia woke up, terrified, seeing no help, and feeling that death was almost imminent.

Sextus then confessed his desire for her, alternating between pleading and threatening her. He tried to manipulate her emotions in every way he could think of. However, when he saw she wouldn't yield to him, nor was she unshaken by the fear of death, he added disgrace to her fear; he said that once she was dead, he would place a naked body of a dead slave next to her body. This would make it appear to her husband, family, and friends that she was killed while during a shameful act of adultery with one of her slaves, a humiliating and despicable thing. Conquered by that threat, not by temptation, lust triumphed over her determined virtue as though by force. Sextus Tarquinius, feeling exultant in having conquered the beautiful woman, departed having violated her honor.

Lucretia, saddened by such an evil thing, sent a message to her father in Rome and to her husband in Ardea: asking each to come quickly with a trusted friend. Something terrible had happened and needed urgent attention. Her father, Spurius Lucretius, came with Publius Valerius, the son of Volesus, and her husband, Collatinus, arrived with Lucius Junius Brutus with whom he had chanced to meet on his way back to with the news of his wife.

They found Lucretia in her room, deeply upset. Upon seeing her loved ones, she broke down in tears. When her husband asked, "Are you well?" she replied, "No. For what is well in a woman who has lost her virtue? The marks of another man are in your bed, Collatinus. But only my body has been violated, my mind is innocent. Death shall be my witness. But give me your hands and swear to me that the adulterer shall not go unpunished. Sextus Tarquinius is the man who came as a guest, but acted like an enemy, and stole from me by force a deadly joy that should be ruinous to him, if you are men".

To this, they all promised to seek justice. Then, the men tried to comfort her, saying that she wasn't at fault. She was forced. They told her that it's the mind that sins, not the body, and without consent, there can be no guilt.

Lucretia responded, "You may decide what is owed to him. As for myself, although I absolve myself of sin, I do not free myself from punishment. No shameless woman shall ever live by Lucretia's example." Before anything else could be said, Lucretia pulled out a dagger she kept beneath her dress and plunged it right it into her heart. She fell forward into the wound, dying in front of the men.

Her husband and father immediately cried out in grief together.