**1.59** Brutus, overwhelmed with shock and sadness, pulled the knife from the Lucretia's wound. He held it up, still dripping with blood, and made a vow: " I swear by this blood, most virtuous before the royal insult, and I call on the gods to witness: that I will execute Lucius Tarquinius Superbus, with his wicked wife and all his children and descendants, with sword, fire, and by whatever force I can, and will not allow them or anyone else to rule in Rome."

Brutus then passed the knife to Collatinus, who swore similarly. Then, to Lucretius. Then, Valerius. They all joined him, amazed to suddenly see a side of Brutus that they had never seen before, revealing a new nature hidden within him. They swore as had been commanded and turning from mourning to anger, followed Brutus as the leader, who was now calling for them to overthrow the monarchy in Rome once and for all.

The men moved Lucretia's body from her home to the Forum, drawing a crowd, as often happens, because of the shocking and disgraceful nature of the event. One after the other, people in the crowd voiced their outrage at the rape that Sextus had committed. The grief of the father moved them deeply. But it was Brutus chastising the mob for their crying and useless complaints that stirred them the most. He called on them to act as men, like Romans, and take up arms against those who committed such violence just as they would against the enemy.

The fiercest of the young men volunteered immediately with weapons in hand. The rest of the youth followed. Leaving Lucretia's father behind as commander in charge of a garrison at the city gates of Collatia so that a warning wouldn't get out to Tarquinius, the rest of the armed men, led by Brutus, set out for Rome. The sight of the men arriving caused panic among the citizens of the City. However, when the people then saw their leaders joining the cause, they knew it was likely a worthy one. The news quickly spread about Sextus, and it caused as much outrage and disgust in Rome as it had in Collatia.

From all parts of the city, people crowded into the Forum as they were summoned by heralds to come before the Tribunus Celerum, which was Brutus' official title, as head of the cavalry and head of the king's bodyguard. Brutus gave a passionate speech to the Romans, shocking them that he was no longer the quiet dullard they thought he was.

He spoke about Sextus Tarquinius' violence and lust, of the abominable rape of Lucretia, her pitiful death, her father's grief, whose sorrow was worsened by the horror of how she died. He then added the arrogance of King Tarquinius and the sufferings of the plebeians who were turned into manual laborers who dug ditches and sewers. These Roman men, conquerors of many lands, were made craftsmen and stonemasons instead of warriors. He reminded them about the murder of the previous king, Servius Tullius, and how his daughter Tullia had driven over her own father's body with her chariot. He called upon the gods who punish crimes against parents. His fiery words of these and, I believe, others more horrible than these, which makes it hard to relate here, enraged the crowd and stirred them into action. They immediately sought to strip King Tarquinius of his power and banish the King and the entire Tarquinius family forever.

Brutus having selected and armed a group of young men who volunteered, headed toward the army camp at Ardea to raise an army against the king. He left Lucretius, Lucretia's father, who had previously been appointed City prefect under Tarquinius, in charge of the City. As this happened, Servius Tullius' daughter, Tullia, fled from home. Everyone she passed had heard what she had done. Men and women cursed her and called for the Furies of her parents to punish her for her crimes.