**1.60** When news of these events reached the camp at Ardea, King Tarquinius was alarmed. He immediately left for Rome to suppress the mob and its unrest. Brutus, on the same road, anticipated the king's arrival and diverted his route to avoid meeting him.

Around the same time, the two men reached their destinations. Brutus arrived at the camp at Ardea and Tarquinius arrived at Rome. As Tarquinius approached Rome, he discovered that the gates had been closed and the Romans were now refusing him entry. The Senate had passed a decree banishing him permanently, and Tarquinius learned he would now be exiled from Rome forever. For Brutus, it was the opposite reaction. The soldiers at the army camp in Ardea joyfully welcomed him and he was celebrated as a liberator of the City. The soldiers drove out the king's two sons immediately.

The two followed their father who, having been exiled, went to Caere, an Etruscan city. Sextus Tarquinius set out for Gabii, which he still considered his personal kingdom. Instead of being welcomed, he was killed by those seeking revenge for crimes which he had committed through murders and robberies.

Lucius Tarquinius Superbus, also known as the Proud or Arrogant, had ruled for twenty-five years. The entire Roman monarchy lasted for two-hundred forty-four years, from the City's founding until its liberation.

Two consuls were then elected by the prefect of the City in the Comitia Centuriata, the assembly of Centuries. This was done in accordance with Servius Tullius' rules. The new consuls' names were Lucius Junius Brutus, the mastermind of the rebellion, and Lucius Tarquinius Collatinus, the husband of Lucretia.