**2.1** From this point on, I'll describe the history of the Roman people, in both war and peace, who were now free. I'll write about their yearly leaders and the supremacy of their laws, which are stronger than any individual. The now-deposed tyrant King Tarquinius' arrogance made this freedom even more appreciated.

The previous kings ruled in such a way that each king could rightfully be considered as the founder of the part of the City that he had added for the growing population. There is no doubt that the same Brutus, who is now praised for expelling Tarquinius Superbus, would have harmed the public good if he had taken the kingdom from any of the previous kings too quickly in his desire for freedom. The mob of shepherds and foreigners, the plebeians, were refugees from their own lands. Imagine if they had found freedom, or at least no punishment, under the protection of the sanctuary of Rome and then had started to cause trouble and fight with the City's leaders before everyone had time to grow. Imagine if they had done this before they had time to become attached to their new home through their wives, children, and love for the land itself. The entire state would have been torn to pieces by internal problems. Instead, it was the calm moderation of the kings that nurtured the people and allowed them to become strong enough to enjoy the benefits of freedom.

We can consider this time the birth of freedom because, unlike kings, consuls were elected yearly and their authority lasted for only a year. This yearly change allowed freedom to flourish rather than any reduction in the authority of the office, which was still like the power of a king.

The first consuls, Brutus and Collatinus, had all the privileges and symbols of power. However, in order to not frighten the people with a double terror, only one consul at a time would have the fasces \[a bundle of rods and an axe, symbolizing authority\]. Brutus would be the first person to have the fasces, with the agreement of Collatinus. He was as eager to protect this new freedom as he had been to establish it.

First, Brutus made the people, still excited about their freedom, swear an oath that they wouldn't allow anyone to be king in Rome. This was to prevent them from being persuaded by the royal family's incoming pleas and bribes. Next, as Tarquinius Superbus' murders had reduced the number of senators, he increased the number of senators to three hundred to strengthen them. Leading men of the equestrian rank were selected for this job. Those who were newly appointed into the Senate were called Conscripti, or newly enrolled. The older senators were called Patres. This worked well to promote harmony inside the City, and it also brought both patricians and plebeians together.