**2.5** The issue of what to do with all the possessions of the Tarquin family, which the Senate had previously voted on, was returned back to the Senate. The senators, now enraged, explicitly prohibited these items from being returned to the Tarquins or from being seized by the public treasury. Instead, they were given to the plebeians to be looted. This was done so that, after sharing in the spoils of the tyrants, people would abandon any hope of reconciling with the Tarquins. 

The Tarquins' land, a field located between the City and the Tiber River, was seized, dedicated to Mars, and named the Campus Martius. At the time, this field of spelt, a type of grain, was ready for harvest, however, it was considered sacrilegious to eat produce from consecrated land. So, the crops were harvested, and a large number of people hauled off the grain and straw in baskets, dumping them all into the Tiber. The river was shallow due to the summer heat, and the piles of grain became lodged in the shallows and covered with mud. Over time, with the addition of other debris brought by the river, an island gradually formed. I believe that mounds were added later by human intervention which helped to strengthen the surface, making it solid enough to support the temples and porticoes there today.

After looting the tyrants' possessions, the traitors were found guilty and sentenced to death. The punishment was particularly striking because Consul Brutus, who was also the father of two of the traitors, was tasked with carrying out the sentence when he should have been removed as a spectator. The young Romans of high status were tied to a stake, but the Consul's sons drew the attention of all the spectators who felt pity for them not just because of the harsh punishment, but also because of the terrible crime they had committed: that they, in the very same year that Rome had been liberated and her liberator was their own father, and the first consulship had come from their house of Junius, had betrayed their countrymen, the Senate, the plebeians, whatever gods and men there were of the Romans, all for a ruthless, arrogant tyrannical king, now an enemy in exile.

The consuls took their seats, and the lictors \[specialized bodyguards\] were sent to carry out the punishment. They stripped the traitors naked, beat them with rods, and beheaded them. Throughout this, the mob watched Brutus' face for signs of expression. His demeanor was stern, though occasionally his emotions, as any father might feel, surfaced. After the guilty were executed, and so that there would be an example on both sides, deterring crime and rewarding loyalty, a sum of money was awarded from the treasury to the informer. This slave, named Vindicius, was also granted freedom and the rights of citizenship. It's said that he was the first person to be freed by the ‘vindicta,' a small rod that is tapped on the slave's head when freed, and some believe that the term vindicta is derived from his name. From then on, it became a rule that those who were freed in this way were considered to have the rights of Roman citizens.