**2.6** A detailed report of what had happened reached Tarquinius. As his hopes of returning as king had been dashed, the former king was now filled with a mix of rage and disappointment. Since deception wasn't working, he decided to resort to an open call for war against his former subjects.

He pleaded with the Etruscan cities, asking them not to abandon him. He especially pleaded with the Veientes and Tarquinians. After all, he was a man of their own blood, a man who had recently ruled a great kingdom but was now exiled and impoverished. They would not let him perish before their very eyes with his young children. While other kings had been invited to rule Rome from foreign lands, Tarquinius maintained that he had been born into it and had dutifully expanded Rome's empire by war until he was ousted by a treacherous plot by those closest to him. The Romans had carved up his kingdom among themselves, he maintained, because not one of them was worthy to rule. They allowed his possessions to be looted by the people so that everyone would be guilty of the crimes against him. Tarquinius wanted his crown and his kingdom back at any cost. Then, he would exact revenge by punishing his ungrateful subjects. If the Etruscans would help him, he proposed, they could also avenge the wrongs done to them in the past, as the Romans had defeated their armies and taken their land from them.

Among the Etruscans, his pleas convinced the people of Veii, whose citizens announced that they were eager to erase their past humiliation and regain what they had lost in war, except now under the leadership of a Roman general. The people of Tarquinii were swayed by his name and their shared heritage. They, too, decided to support him, seeing it as an honor that one of their own should rule Rome. Thus, the armies of these two states joined Tarquinius in his quest to reclaim his kingdom and exact revenge on the Romans.

As their combined army entered Roman territories, the Roman consuls marched to meet them. Consul Valerius led the infantry in a phalanx or tightly packed formation, while Consul Brutus rode ahead with the cavalry to scout the enemy. Similarly, the enemy's cavalry was in front. Tarquinius' son, Arruns Tarquinius, led their cavalry, with the king himself following with the legions. While still at a distance, Arruns recognized Consul Brutus by his escort of lictors. As they drew nearer, he clearly recognized the Consul by his face, and, in a fit of rage, exclaimed, "That is the man who drove us into exile from our City! Look at him proudly parading, flaunting our insignias! Gods, avengers of kings, help me now!"

With these words, he dug spurs into his horse and rode straight at the Consul. Brutus saw that he was aiming toward him. It was a point of honor in those days for the leaders to engage in single combat, so he eagerly accepted the challenge. They charged at each other with such fury, neither of them thinking of protecting himself and thinking only to wound the other, that each drove his spear at the same moment through the other's shield, and they fell dying from their horses, with their spears still sticking in them.

The rest of the cavalry began to fight, soon followed by the infantry. The battle was evenly matched, with both sides gaining and losing ground. On both sides, the right wings were victorious, while the left wings were defeated. The Veientes, accustomed to being defeated at the hands of the Romans, were routed and fled. The Tarquinians, the new enemy from Tarquinii, not only held their ground but also forced the Romans to retreat.