**2.8** Following this, a procession of laws followed that not only absolved Valerius from any suspicion of seeking royal power, but also swung so far in the opposite direction that it made him appear as a champion of the people. As a result, he was given the nickname Publicola \[meaning "one who courts the people."\] 

The laws which were well-received among the people were ones that granted the people the right to appeal against the magistrates and ones which ordered the loss of property and death to anyone who attempted to seize power to become king. After Publicola passed these laws as the sole consul, earning all the credit, he organized an assembly to elect a new colleague. Spurius Lucretius was elected as consul, but due to his old age and declining strength, he was unable to fulfill his duties and passed away after a few days. Marcus Horatius Pulvillus was chosen to replace Lucretius. Some old records don't mention Lucretius as a consul and instead list Horatius immediately after Brutus. I suspect that's because Lucretius' term as Consul was uneventful, so it was overlooked.

The Temple of Jupiter on the Capitoline Hill hadn't yet been dedicated. Consul Valerius and Consul Horatius drew lots to decide who would have the honor of dedicating it. The lot fell to Horatius. Valerius Publicola left to fight in the war against the Veientes.

The supporters of Valerius were more upset than they should have been that the dedication of such a famous temple was given to Consul Horatius. They tried everything to prevent it. When all their attempts had failed, they resorted to cruelty by bringing the disgraceful news to Consul Horatius at the very moment he began the ritual of prayer to the gods, just as he grabbed the doorpost, that his son had been killed and that he could not continue the dedication because his family was now in mourning. Whether he didn't believe them or just had incredible self-control isn't known for sure and is hard to guess. He allowed this message to interrupt him only to order that his son be buried. Still holding onto the doorpost, he finished the prayer and dedicated the temple.

These were the events that took place at home and in war during the first year after the kings were expelled.