**2.11** As King Porsena's initial blitz was unsuccessful, he shifted his strategy from assault to blockade. After establishing a military base on the Janiculum Hill, he set up his camp on the plains and along the Tiber River. He then called for boats from all areas to patrol the river, preventing any food or supplies from reaching Rome. The boats were also used to transport his soldiers across the river to raid various locations as needed. In a short time, Porsena made the areas surrounding Rome so dangerous that all resources, including livestock, were moved into the City for protection. No one dared to leave the City gates.

The Romans allowed the Etruscans to move around freely on orders of Valerius. He was waiting for the right moment to surprise a large number of men and chose to hold back his retaliation for a bigger impact. To set a trap for the raiders, Valerius instructed his men to drive their livestock out of the Esquiline Gate, the one farthest from the enemy. He assumed they would learn of this because some slaves would likely betray them due to the blockade and famine. As expected, a deserter informed the Etruscans, and larger than usual groups of the enemy crossed the river in hopes of capturing all the livestock.

Publius Valerius then ordered Titus Herminius to hide and lie in ambush with a small group of soldiers at the second stone or about two miles from the City on the Gabina Road. He also instructed Spurius Larcius to position himself at the Colline Gate with a group of young, lightly-armed soldiers. They were to block the enemy's return path to the river once they had passed. The other Consul, Titus Lucretius, left the City through the Naevian Gate with several maniples of soldiers. Valerius himself led a handpicked group of soldiers to the Caelian Hill. These last were the first to be seen by the enemy.

Just as planned, when Herminius became aware that fighting had begun, he emerged from his hiding place and attacked the rear of the Etruscans who were engaged with Valerius. Then, with a shout, Roman soldiers came from both sides, from the Colline Gate to the right and the Naevian Gate to the left. The Etruscans were trapped. Outmatched in strength for battle, yet also not able to escape as all routes had been blocked by the Romans, they were slaughtered in the middle. This put an end to such irregular and scattered raids by the Etruscans across Roman territory.