**2.14** The peaceful exit of the Etruscan king from the Janiculum Hill area of the City seems to contradict an old tradition that continues to this day at public auctions. When things that were looted are sold in present day, it's referred to as "selling the goods of King Porsena." The origin of this practice must have either started during the war and continued into peacetime, or it could have evolved from a more good-natured practice, and not just a notice of the sale of enemy property, as the phrase suggests.

The most believable explanation passed down is that Porsena, when leaving the Janiculum Hill, gifted the Romans with his well-supplied camp, which was filled with provisions from the nearby fertile Etruscan fields. The City was depleted from the long siege at the time. To prevent the goods from being mobbed and plundered by the people, they were sold to the people who were allowed in. This was then referred to as the "goods of Porsena." The phrase seems to express more gratitude for the gift than the selling of the king's wealth, which the Roman people didn't have the right to do.

After ending the war with Rome, Porsena sent his son Arruns and part of his army to besiege Aricia to avoid the appearance of his army having been deployed without achieving anything worthwhile. The Aricians were initially surprised and scared, as they didn't expect this. However, help from the people of Latium and Cumae gave them hope, and they decided to confront the Etruscans in battle. At the start of the battle, the Etruscans' first charge was so fierce that they defeated the Aricians immediately. However, the Cumae cleverly moved soldiers to one side. When the Etruscans flew past them in a chaotic charge, the Cumae turned around and attacked them from behind. This stratagem led to the Etruscans, who were close to victory, being surrounded and cut down in the center.

A small group of them survived, and having lost their general and with no other refuge, they fled to Rome unarmed, looking like beggars. They were welcomed warmly and distributed amongst different houses. Once their wounds healed, many returned home and spoke of the kindness they had received from Rome. Some, however, chose to stay in Rome out of affection for their hosts and the City. They were given a district in which they could live, now called the Tuscan Quarter.