**4.54** Gnaeus Cornelius Cossus and Lucius Furius Medullinus, for the second time, were chosen as consuls.

Of the things that upset the plebeians, they were never more outraged than when they weren't allowed to elect consular tribunes. They showed their anger during the nomination of quaestors by electing three plebeians as quaestors for the first time ever. This left only one spot for a patrician, Caeso Fabius Ambustus, while three plebeians, Quintus Silius, Publius Aelius, and Publius Pupius, plebeians from highly regarded families, were chosen over young men from very prestigious families.

It is said that the Icilii family were the ones who encouraged such a free vote for the people. Members of a famously anti-patrician family, three of whom had been elected plebeian tribunes that year, they promised the plebeians many great reforms, and this made the plebeians very hopeful. However, they declared that they would take no further action unless the plebeians showed courage, even in the quaestor elections which the Senate had officially opened to both patricians and plebeians, to claim what they had long desired and which the laws had now put within their reach.

The plebeians saw this as a significant victory. They did not see the quaestorship as a great honor by itself, but as a steppingstone for new men, plebeians, to the consulship and the honors of a Triumph.

The patricians, on the other hand, grumbled not as if honors would be shared, but about losing them. If things continued this way, there would be no need to raise sons, since they would be banished from the roles that their ancestors once held, watching others possess the honors that belonged to them. Without any military command or political power, they would have few options other than to act as salii or flamens for the people.

Both sides became increasingly agitated. The plebeians had gained new courage and now had three powerful leaders, the Icilii, to champion their cause. The patricians, seeing that all future elections could be like the one for quaestors, fought hard for the election of consuls, which wasn't yet open to the plebeians. The Icilii, however, argued that consular tribunes must be elected and that the plebeians should be given positions of honor, at last.