**4.55** But the consuls had no ongoing proceedings available to counter the tribunes' proposals and no way to assert consular authority, when, by a wonderful piece of luck it was reported the Volscians and the Aequians had crossed their borders and raided the Latin and Hernician territories.

The consuls began a draft to gather troops for war in response to a decree from the Senate. The plebeian tribunes strongly opposed this, claiming that this was a fortunate opportunity for themselves and the plebeians. There were three plebeian tribunes, all were extremely fierce and capable men, already considered distinguished at least among the plebeians. Two of them each chose a consul to monitor closely with constant effort to obstruct his actions. The third was given the task of either restraining or inciting the plebeians through his speeches in the public assembly. The result was that neither the draft by the consuls nor the elections sought by the plebeian tribunes could go forward.

Then, luck seemed to favor the plebeians. News arrived that the Aequians had retaken the citadel of Carventum. The Roman soldiers who were supposed to be guarding the citadel had wandered off in search of loot, leaving only a few guards behind. The Aequians killed these few guards. They then killed the others as they came running back to the citadel, before moving to the ones still out in the field.

This unfortunate event strengthened the plebeian tribunes' position, and they were unsuccessfully urged to stop obstructing the draft. Since they refused to yield, neither to the public emergency nor to the personal blame they incurred, they managed to get a Senate decree passed for the election of consular tribunes. However, the decree stipulated one strict condition: that no current plebeian tribune could be considered as a candidate, and no one could be re-elected as a plebeian tribune for the following year. The Senate was clearly targeting the Icilii, whom they suspected of seeking the consular tribune position as a reward for their seditious conduct as plebeian tribunes.

Then, the consuls began to gather troops with the draft, the oath was held, and preparations for war were made with the agreement of all social classes. The differing accounts of historians make it unclear whether both consuls went to the citadel of Carventum or if one stayed behind to oversee the elections. However, it's certain that the Romans withdrew from the citadel of Carventum after a long and unsuccessful siege. This same Roman army then went on to recapture Verrugo in the Volscian territory and caused great destruction and captured significant loot in both the Aequian and Volscian territories.