**4.57** This argument took place at a very inconvenient time, when a significant war was on the horizon. Consular Tribunes Julius and Cornelius argued at length about how unfair it was that a position of honor given to them by the people was now being taken away, even though they were generals well-equipped to lead the war.

Then the third consular tribune, Gaius Servilius Ahala, spoke up. He said he had been quiet not because he was unsure of his opinion, for what loyal citizen would place his own interests distinct from that of the state, but because he wanted his colleagues to respect the authority of the Senate on their own, rather than allow the power of the plebeian tribunes to be invoked against them. Then, too, he would still give them time to change their overly obstinate minds if circumstances allowed. But since the demands of war do not wait for men's decisions, he cared more about the public good than his colleagues' approval. If the Senate still felt the same way, he would declare a dictator the next night. If anyone vetoed the decree, he would be satisfied with the authority of the Senate alone. His actions earned him praise and goodwill from everyone. The next night, after naming Publius Cornelius as Dictator, he, himself, was then appointed as his Master of the Horse. He became an example for his colleagues, showing how honor and opportunity often come more easily to those who don't seek them.

The war wasn't particularly memorable. The enemy was defeated at Antium in a single, easy battle. The victorious army devastated the Volscian territory. They stormed their fortress at Lake Fucinus, capturing it, and three-thousand men were taken prisoner. The rest of the Volscians retreated behind their walls and did not defend their lands. The Dictator, having waged the war with luck on his side, returned to the City more notable for his success than his fame, and resigned his position.

The consular tribunes did not mention electing consuls, probably out of resentment for the Senate appointing a dictator. Instead, they announced the election of consular tribunes. This caused even more confusion for the patricians, who felt betrayed by their own side.

So, just like the previous year, they proposed the least deserving plebeians as candidates, which made everyone, even the deserving ones, look bad. At that point, they got the most distinguished patricians to run. These patricians won all the positions, and no plebeians were allowed to be chosen.

Four consular tribunes were elected, all of whom had already served: Lucius Furius Medullinus, Gaius Valerius Potitus, Numerius Fabius Vibulanus, and Gaius Servilius Ahala, who was re-elected with continued honor, both because of his past achievements and because of the popularity he had recently gained through his exceptional restraint.