**7.11** And, by Hercules, that fight was of such great importance to the whole war that the army of the Gauls abandoned their camp in a state of panic during the night, retreating into the territory of Tibur. There, they formed an alliance of war with the Tiburtines, who supplied them with generous provisions before they crossed into Campania. This was the reason why, during the following year, Consul Gaius Poetelius Balbus led an army against the Tiburtines, by order of the people, when the province of the Hernicians had fallen to his colleague, Consul Marcus Fabius Ambustus,

To aid their Tiburtine allies, the Gauls then returned from Campania, causing cruel destruction in the Labican, Tusculan, and Alban territories. Despite the state being content with a consul leading the fight against Tibur, the threat posed by the Gauls necessitated the appointment of a dictator. Quintus Servilius Ahala was appointed and named Titus Quinctius as Master of the Horse. With the Senate's approval, he vowed to hold Great Games if the war ended favorably.

The Dictator ordered Consul Poetelius' army to remain in the Tibur area and continue his war. He then compelled all the younger men to take the oath of military service, none of whom refused. A battle with the Gauls took place near the Colline Gate with the full strength of the city in full view of the soldiers' parents, spouses and children. The soldiers' loved ones were a great source of encouragement to the spirit when far away, but now, in front of their eyes, they set the soldiers on fire with a sense of honor and compassion for their vulnerability. 

The slaughter was great on both sides, but the Gallic line finally broke. They attempted to retreat to the city of Tibur, the source of their main support, but were intercepted by Consul Poetelius not far from the city. When the Tiburtines ran out to try to assist the Gauls, both armies were driven back inside their gates.

Both Dictator Servilius Ahala and Consul Poetelius handled the situation with the Gauls and Tibur exceptionally well. The other consul, Fabius Ambustus, initially engaged in minor skirmishes, but eventually defeated the Hernicians in a single battle when the Romans attacked with their full force. The Dictator praised the consuls in the Senate and before the people, attributing his own achievements to them, and then resigned his dictatorship. Consul Poetelius celebrated a double Triumph over the Gauls and Tibur, while Consul Fabius was content with a simple ovation upon entering the City.

The Tiburtines mocked Poetelius' triumph, questioning where he had faced them in battle. They claimed that only a few of their people had ventured outside Tibur's gates to watch the Gauls' disarray and retreat. When they saw themselves being attacked and the indiscriminate slaughter going on, they retreated back into the city. If the Romans considered this worthy of a Triumph, they warned, they would soon see greater chaos at their own walls.