**7.14** Although the Dictator believed that Tullius meant well and had a good cause, he feared that it set a dangerous precedent. Nevertheless, he decided to act according to the soldiers' desires. He privately asked Tullius what the matter was and how did it come about. 

Tullius earnestly asked the Dictator not to think that he had forgotten military discipline, his own identity, or the respect he owed to his commander. He chose to lead the agitated crowd, who often mirror their instigators, to prevent someone else from stepping forward which such crowds are prone to elect. He wouldn't act without his commander's orders, but he also understood that a dictator must ensure that the army remains obedient. Such agitated minds can't be placated: they'll choose their own time and place to fight if they aren't led by the commander.

As they were discussing this, two Roman soldiers took some grazing cattle near a rampart while some Gauls were driving them away. This led to the Gauls throwing stones at them. Shouting broke out from the nearest Roman post, and several people rushed forward from both sides. The situation was close to escalating into a full-blown battle, but the centurions quickly intervened and stopped the conflict. This incident confirmed Tullius's words to Dictator Sulpicius, and with no time to waste, a proclamation was issued that they would fight the next day.

The Dictator, relying more on his soldiers' bravery than their numbers, started to think of a way to intimidate the enemy. He came up with a clever plan, which many generals from our own (as well as other nations) have since adopted, some even in our own time. He ordered the packs on the mules to be removed, leaving only two blankets, and then mounted the mule drivers, arming them with weapons either from the sick or from the captive prisoners. With about a thousand of these men on mules he then mixed in a hundred cavalry. He ordered them to ascend the mountain above the camp during the night, hide in the woods, and stay there until he gave them a signal. 

As soon as day broke, he began to extend his line of regular troops along the base of the mountain, specifically so that the enemy would be facing the mountains. His plan was to instill fear in the Gauls, and this would prove almost more useful than actual strength.

At first, the Gallic leaders believed that the Romans wouldn't come down to the plains for battle. However, when the Gauls saw that they had suddenly begun to descend from the mountain, they were so eager to fight that they rushed forward and began the battle before their leaders could give the signal.