**7.15** The right wing of the Gauls launched an attack so fierce that, if Dictator Sextus hadn't been present, the Romans might not have been able to withstand the assault. The Dictator called out to Sextus Tullius by name, chiding him if this was how he had promised the soldiers would fight? Where were the loud demands for weapons now? Where were the threats of starting the battle without the general's orders? Here was the general himself calling them to battle, advancing, armed, before the first standards! Would any of those who were supposed to lead now follow him? They were bold in the camp, but cowards on the battlefield. The soldiers knew these words were true. Out of shame, they charged at the enemy, forgetting their fear. This sudden, almost mad, attack threw the enemy into chaos. The cavalry then charged at the disoriented enemy, causing them to retreat.

Seeing the Gallic line falter on the right, the Dictator moved some troops to the left wing where he saw a large group of the enemy advancing. He then gave the agreed-upon signal to those on the mountain. A new battle cry erupted from that direction, and the Romans on the mountain then appeared to be descending, moving toward the Gallic camp. The Gauls, fearing they would be cut off, retreated toward their camp in total panic. Marcus Valerius, the Master of the Horse, had been riding behind enemy fortifications after he had scattered their right wing, and met them. The Gauls then turned and scattered in chaos to the mountains and woods. Many of them were caught by the mule riders masquerading as cavalry. Those who had fled in panic into the woods were slaughtered after the battle had ended.

Not since Camillus had anyone achieved such a complete victory over the Gauls as had Dictator Gaius Sulpicius, who entered Rome in a Triumph. He also dedicated a considerable amount of gold taken from Gallic spoils, which he had enclosed in a square carved stone, on the Capitoline Hill. 

That same year, the consuls also fought with varying degrees of success. Consul Gnaeus Plautius defeated and subdued the Hernicians. His colleague Consul Fabius, however, fought imprudently and ill-advisedly against the Tarquinians. The Roman losses on the battlefield weren't as significant as the capture and sacrificial execution of three hundred and seven Roman soldiers, prisoners of the Tarquinians. It was an act so vile that it brought even more shame to the Roman people because of its horrific cruelty. 

Additionally, the Roman territory was ravaged by the Privernates and later by soldiers from Velitrae. That same year, two tribes, the Pomptina and the Publilia, were added. The Great Games that Marcus Furius had promised during his dictatorship were held. 

For the first time, a proposal was made to the people about election bribery by Gaius Poetelius, a plebeian tribune, with the Senate's approval. This bill was seen as a way to curb the ambition of "new men" who were known to frequent markets and meeting places to win favor.