**5.45** Friends and opponents alike agreed that there was no one alive with such a mastery of war as Camillus had. After the assembly was dismissed, they rested and prepared themselves, eagerly waiting for the signal to be given. When it arrived, they joined Camillus at the city gates during the quiet of early night. They didn't travel far from the city before they found the Gauls' camp, just as Camillus predicted: unguarded and carelessly open on all sides.

The Romans attacked with a great clamor. There was no battle, just indiscriminate slaughter. The Gauls, naked and deep in sleep, were massacred. Those who were farthest away woke up confused, not knowing what was happening or where the noise was coming from. In panic, they tried to escape, some of them unknowingly running into the enemy. Many of them were chased into the territory of Antium, where the townspeople rallied together, surrounded them, and killed them all.

Meanwhile, a similar slaughter was committed by the Etruscans in the territory of Veii. Etruscans in the area showed no sympathy for the City that had been their neighbor for nearly four-hundred years and was now overwhelmed by a strange and unheard-of enemy. Instead, they took advantage of the situation to raid the Roman territory. After loading themselves with plunder, they intended to attack Veii, where the Roman garrison, the last stronghold and only surviving hope of the Roman name was stationed.

The Roman soldiers saw the Etruscans scattered across the countryside, driving the cattle they had stolen before them, and noticed their camp not far from Veii. This sight first filled the soldiers with self-pity, then outrage, and finally a desire for revenge. Were the Etruscans, whom they had spared from the war with the Gauls, now mocking their misfortunes? They could barely control their anger and desire to attack them immediately.

But Quintus Caedicius, the Roman centurion they had chosen as their commander, held them back until nightfall. All they lacked was a leader as capable as Camillus; in all other aspects, the plan and the outcome, were the same as if Camillus had been in command. Guided by some captured Etruscan leaders who had survived the previous night's slaughter, they marched to the saltworks against another group of Etruscans and, on the following night, unexpectedly carried out a greater slaughter, returning to Veii with a double victory.