**5.46** Back in Rome, the siege on the Citadel was generally sluggish and there was silence on both sides. The Gauls were focused on ensuring that none of their enemies escaped between their lines.

Suddenly, a young Roman man gained the admiration of both his fellow Romans and the enemy. Traditionally, the Fabian tribe had a ritual that they performed at specific times on the Quirinal Hill. To carry out this ritual, Gaius Fabius Dorsuo descended from the Capitoline Hill. His toga was folded up in true Gabine fashion with a special belt, and he held the sacred vessels for sacrifice in his hands. The young man walked through the enemy's line without being affected by their calls or threats. He reached the Quirinal Hill and performed the ritual. After the ritual had been solemnly performed and completed to entirety, he returned to the Capitoline Hill with the same firm expression as he carefully walked back to his own people. He was confident that the gods were pleased because he hadn't neglected their worship when he was afraid of death. The Gauls were either shocked by his boldness or they were understanding about religious ritual, as they also were scrupulous in this way.

Meanwhile, morale was improving for the Romans at Veii, as their courage and strength continued growing every day. Romans continued to come to Veii from the countryside, having fled after the unsuccessful battle and capture of Rome. Volunteers from Latium were also coming to share in the spoils. It seemed like the right time to reclaim their City from the enemy.

However, they needed a leader. They were reminded of Camillus, and many of them were soldiers who had fought successfully under his leadership and auspices. Quintus Caedicius, the acting commander, acknowledged his own limitations, stating that he wouldn't let anyone, whether a god or a man, take his command away from him, but would himself, request a proper commander to be appointed. Everyone agreed that Camillus should be recalled from Ardea, but they decided to consult the Senate in Rome first, even though they might be ashamed to ask him. They were careful to follow proper procedures and maintain the distinctions of things even in their desperate situation.

To deliver the message, they had to pass through the enemy's garrisons at great risk to get to the Citadel. A brave and energetic young man named Pontius Cominius volunteered to do this. With the Tiber River flowing in his favor, he floated on a piece of cork to the City. From there, where he was nearest to the bank, he climbed onto the Capitoline Hill over a part of the rock that was steep and rough and therefore not guarded by the enemy. He was taken to the magistrates and delivered the message from the army.

The Senate then adopted a decree that Camillus, recalled from exile by a vote of the people in the Comitia Curiata assembly, should immediately be proclaimed Dictator, so that the soldiers should have the commander they wished. Cominus then left the Capitoline the same way he arrived and quickly took the orders to Veii. Ambassadors were then sent to Camillus in Ardea, and they escorted him to Veii.

I prefer to believe that he didn't leave Ardea until he knew that the law had been passed, since he couldn't change his residence without permission from the people, nor could he lead an army and hold the office of dictator without the privilege of the auspices. The Lex Curiata was passed and Camillus was declared Dictator in his absence.