**5.47** While events were unfolding at Veii, the Citadel and Capitoline Hill in Rome were in serious jeopardy. The Gauls had either noticed the footprints of the messenger from Veii, or they had independently observed the accessible climb up the rock near the Shrine of Carmenta on the side of the Capitoline Hill. On a moonlit night, they sent an unarmed individual ahead to test the path. They passed their weapons along in case there was trouble, leaning on each other and lifting each other up in turn, sometimes dragging up others, in complete silence. They were so quiet that they went unnoticed by the guards and the dogs, a restless animal, which are usually alert to nighttime sounds. However, they didn't escape the attention of the geese, which were considered sacred to Juno Regina and had been spared despite a severe food shortage. This turned out to be the Romans' saving grace.

Marcus Manlius Capitolinus, who three years before had been consul and a renowned warrior, was awakened by the geese honking and flapping their wings. He quickly armed himself and rallied others to do the same. Rushing to the scene while others were still in disarray, he used the boss of his shield to knock a Gaul, who had reached the summit, off the edge. The falling Gaul then knocked others behind him down, and Manlius killed those who had dropped their weapons in fear and were clinging to the rocks. Soon, others joined Manlius, pelting the enemy with javelins and stones. The entire group of Gauls lost their footing and fell headlong down the cliff into a chaotic heap.

After the immediate threat had passed, the Romans tried to rest for the remainder of the night, although their minds were still filled with anxiety from the recent danger. At dawn, the Roman soldiers were called to an assembly before the military tribunes by the sound of a trumpet. Rewards were to be given for merit and punishments for failure. Manlius was the first to be praised for his bravery and given gifts, not only by the military tribunes, but also by the soldiers. In a gesture of gratitude, they each brought to his house in the Citadel half a pound of grain and quarter-pint of wine. This may seem insignificant; however, given the food shortage, it was a significant gesture of respect. Each man was willing to give up some of his own food to honor Manlius.

The guards who had failed to notice the enemy's approach were then called forward. Quintus Sulpicius, the consular tribune, announced that he would punish them all according to military law. However, the soldiers blamed one guard, and Sulpicius spared the rest. The guilty guard was thrown off the rock, with everyone's approval. From then on, both the Gauls and the Romans were more vigilant: the Gauls, knowing it was common for news to pass between the Veii and Rome, and the Romans, mindful of the danger they had narrowly escaped during the night.