**5.49** But no force, divine or mortal, would allow the Romans to live under the disgrace of ransom. By some chance, before the detestable price was fully paid, with all the gold not yet weighed, Dictator Camillus arrived. He commanded the gold to be taken away and the Gauls to leave. When they resisted, insisting they had made a deal, he denied that the agreement was valid. It had been made with a lower-ranking official without his approval. After this, he sent the Gauls off with a warning: prepare for battle.

Camillus instructed his men to throw their baggage in a pile, ready their weapons, and reclaim Rome with steel, not gold. Having before them as a reminder were the temples of the gods, their wives and children, and their war-ravaged land, because these were the things they were sworn to defend, recover, and avenge. He then positioned his army, as the terrain allowed, on the uneven ground of the partially destroyed City and ensured that everything was chosen, prepared and provided for the benefit of his troops in the art of war.

The Gauls, though still shocked by the sudden turn of events, armed themselves. Overflowing with more rage than judgment, they charged the Romans. However, Fortune had now shifted; divine aid and human wisdom were on the Roman side. Thus, during the initial charge, the Gauls were cut down as easily as they had defeated the Romans at the Allia River.

They then fought a second, more conventional engagement, about eight miles out on the Gabinian Way where the Gauls had retreated after fleeing. Once again, they were defeated under the leadership and auspices of Camillus. This time, the victorious Romans showed no mercy; the Gauls' camp was captured, all survivors were killed, and not even a single messenger was left to report the defeat.

Dictator Camillus, having freed his nation from the enemy, returned back to Rome in Triumph. Among the coarse military jokes, he was called a second Romulus, a Father to the Romans, and a second Founder of the City.

Camillus had saved his City in war. His next move, inevitably, was to save it a second time, now that peace had returned, by stopping widespread migration to Veii. The plebeian tribunes were now pushing for this move more forcefully than ever after the City lay in ruins, and the plebeians were more open to it. This was why he didn't give up his dictatorship after the Triumph; the Senate pleaded with him not to leave the state in such an unstable condition.