**8.13** The following year, Lucius Furius Camillus and Gaius Maenius became consuls. To show their anger at Aemilius' blatant neglect of his duties the previous year as consul, the Senate angrily insisted that Pedum should be captured with all available forces and destroyed. The new consuls, under pressure to prioritize the issue, put all other things aside and set out to Pedum.

The Latins were now in a state where they couldn't endure war or peace. They lacked the resources for war, but scorned peace because they had lost their land, which they greatly resented. It seemed smartest to adopt a middle course: stay within their towns to avoid provoking the Romans and, if the siege of any town was announced, help would be brought from all sides to the besieged. Only a few states were willing to help the people of Pedum; the people of Tibur and the Praenestines, who were closest, reached Pedum first, while the Aricini, Lanuvi, and Velitrae who had attempted to join the Volscians of Antium, were routed by Consul Maenius who had attacked them with a surprise assault at the Astura River.

Camillus, facing a larger and stronger force from Tibur at Pedum, had a challenging but still equally successful battle. A sudden sortie of townspeople during the battle caused the greatest confusion. Camillus, turning a part of his army against them, not only drove them back within their walls, but, after routing both the townspeople and their allies on the same day, he took the town by storm using scaling ladders.

Both consuls then decided, with great confidence and courage, to lead their victorious armies from the capture of a single city to the conquering of all Latium. They didn't stop until they had conquered all of Latium, either by storming the towns or by accepting their surrender, individually. After placing garrisons in the captured towns, the consuls returned to Rome to a universally acknowledged Triumph, where they were honored with equestrian statues of them placed in the Forum, a rare compliment at that time.

Before the meeting to elect the next year's consuls, Camillus addressed the Senate about the Latin peoples:

"Senators, what needed to be done in Latium through war and arms has now come to an end, by the kindness of the gods and the bravery of our soldiers. We have defeated the enemy armies at Pedum and the Astura River. All the Latin towns, and Antium, either taken by force or recovered from the Volscians are now occupied by our garrisons. We must now consider how to maintain their peaceful submission and prevent further rebellions."

"The immortal gods have given you the power to decide whether Latium will continue to exist by placing the decision in your hands. You can ensure permanent peace for yourselves with the Latins by choosing either to punish them or to forgive them."

"Do you wish to be harsh towards the surrendered and conquered people? You are free to destroy all of Latium, creating a vast desert from a place that has often provided us with a strong army of allies in many great wars. Or, do you wish to follow the example of our ancestors and increase the Roman state by accepting the defeated as citizens?"

"The opportunity to grow the City with the utmost glory is in your hands. Certainly, the government is most secure when its subjects are happy to obey. Whatever decision you make, it must be made quickly. So many people are suspended between hope and fear. It's necessary to work out your own concerns about them and resolve their status as soon as possible while their minds are stunned and preoccupied with the uncertainty of either punishment or mercy."

"It was our duty to ensure you had the full power to deliberate this issue; it's your duty to decide what's best for you and for the Republic."