**8.14** The leading members of the Senate praised the consul's presentation regarding the overall situation. However, they replied, not all Latins were alike. Each people had its own different set of circumstances, so an effective plan might be to consider each case individually and make decisions based on their merits. Accordingly, a report was made and a decree was passed on each one:

The Lanuvians were granted citizenship rights, and their religious rights and sacred places were restored to them with the provision that the temple and grove of Juno Sospita would be shared between the Lanuvian citizens and the Roman people.

The people of Aricia, Nomentum, and Pedum were accepted as citizens under the same conditions as the Lanuvians.

The Tusculans continued to have the citizenship rights they already had, and the crime of rebellion was redirected from public wrongdoing to a few instigators.

The Veliterni, people of Velitrae, who had been Roman citizens for a long time, were severely punished because they had rebelled many times; their walls were torn down, and their senate was disbanded, and they were ordered to live on the other side of the Tiber River.  The fine for any Veliterni caught on the Roman side of the river was set at one thousand pounds of aes rude and they would be held in jail until all the money was paid. Colonists were sent to the land of the Velitrae senators, and, with these additions, Velitrae regained the appearance of the ancient population.

A new colony was also sent to Antium, with the provision that if the Antiates wanted to be registered as colonists, they would be allowed to do so. Their warships were removed, either they were hauled to Roman docks or just outright burned. The people of Antium were forbidden access to the sea, but they were granted citizenship rights.

The people of Tibur and the Praenestines were fined some land, not only because of the guilt of the rebellion, which they shared with the other Latins, but also because they had previously joined forces with the Gauls, a savage nation, due to their dislike of the Roman government.

The other Latin states lost the privileges of intermarriage, commerce, and holding meetings among themselves.

Capua, in honor of their cavalry who had refused to rebel with the Latins, and the people of Fundi and Formiae, because the roads through their territories had always been safe and peaceful, were granted citizenship without the right to vote. 

It was decided that the people of Cumae and Suessula would have the same rights and be in the same position as Capua.

As was said, some of the Antiates' ships were hauled up and placed into the naval dockyards of Rome and some were burned.  Some of the prows \[rostra\] of these ships were chosen to adorn a platform built in the Forum, which was then called "The Rostra".