**8.18** The subsequent year, under the consulship of Marcus Claudius Marcellus and Gaius Valerius, was a terrible one. Some say it was due to plague. Others say it was human treachery. I find the surnames of Flaccus and Potitus variously in the annals as the surname for Valerius, but that detail is not important.

One thing I hope is not true, and not all authors agree on this, is a report that people died from poisoning and it was this mass death that caused the year to be infamously remembered for plague. This information is passed down to us, and I must report it to maintain the credibility of the original writers.

When leading figures of the state began dying from similar illnesses, all with nearly the same outcome, a certain female slave came forward to Quintius Fabius Maximus, the curule aedile, promising to reveal the cause of the public sickness if she was given assurance that he would protect her and her revelation wouldn't harm her. Fabius brought this to the consuls, who then presented it to the Senate. With the Senate's agreement, immunity was given to the informant.

She revealed that the state's affliction was due to the evil actions of certain women, specifically matrons, who were creating poisonous concoctions. If the authorities followed her, they could catch these women in the act. Upon following the informant, they discovered women mixing poisons and found more already prepared and stored away. 

These poisons were brought to the Forum, and twenty matrons, who were found in possession of them, were then summoned. Two of them, Cornelia and Sergia, both of patrician families, claimed that these mixtures were purely medicinal. To prove the informant wrong, they were ordered to drink them to prove they had not made a false statement in the sight of all. 

After taking time to confer, while the crowd had cleared the room, they consulted the others. None refused. They all agreed to drink. They all drank and died, victims of their own malicious scheme.

Their companions were immediately arrested. They implicated a large number of other matrons, leading to the conviction of one hundred and seventy of them. Until that day, there had never been an investigation into poisoning in Rome. The event was treated as a supernatural horror and seemed more like the act of mad people than deliberate wickedness.

The annals mention that during previous plebeian secessions, a nail had been driven into the temple by a dictator and by doing this act of atonement, sanity was restored to the people's alienated and disturbed minds. It was decided that a dictator should be appointed for the purpose of driving the nail. Gnaeus Quinctilius was nominated as Dictator and appointed Lucius Valerius as Master of the Horse. After the nail was driven, they resigned from their offices.