**8.20** While the siege of Privernum was being waged by the two consular armies, one of the consuls was called back to Rome for the elections. This was the year when chariot cells were first built in the circus.

The public was still focused on the war at Privernum when a rumor that the Gauls were now preparing for war reached them. It was a concern that the Senate never took lightly. The new consuls, Lucius Aemilius Mamercinus and Gaius Plautius, were ordered to divide the provinces between themselves on the first of July, the date when they took office. Mamercinus, who was assigned the Gauls, was instructed to recruit soldiers without accepting any excuses for exemption. It's said that even the least suitable for military service, such as common laborers, craftsmen, and the sedentary were summoned.

A large army was assembled at Veii, ready to intercept the Gauls. They decided not to move too far away in case the enemy reached the city unnoticed by another route. After a few days, once it was confirmed that the Gauls were inactive for now, the entire force was then redirected towards Privernum.

There are two different versions of what happened next. Some say that the city was captured by force and that Vitruvius Vaccus was captured alive. Others argue that before the fighting began, the townspeople carried a caduceus \[the symbol of truce\] and surrendered to the consul, allowing Vitruvius to be handed over by his own men.

The Senate, when consulted about Vitruvius and the people of Privernum, instructed Consul Plautius to tear down the walls of Privernum, leave a strong garrison there, and return home to celebrate his Triumph. They also ordered that Vitruvius be imprisoned until the consul's return, then be beaten with rods and executed. His houses on the Palatine hill were to be demolished, and his possessions given to Semo Sancus to be consecrated. Whatever brass was melted down from them was to be used to make bronze orbs and placed in the shrine of Sancus, opposite the Temple of Quirinus. 

As for the senate of Privernum, it was decided that anyone who had continued to act as a senator in Privernum, after the revolt against the Romans, should live on the other side of the Tiber, under the same restrictions as those of Velitrae.

After these decrees were passed, there was no further mention of the Privernians until Consul Plautius had celebrated his Triumph. After the Triumph, the consul, having killed Vitruvius and his accomplices, thought that everyone was satisfied with the punishment of the guilty, and he could safely bring up the matter of the general population of Privernians. He said:

"Now that the instigators of the revolt have received their deserved punishment from both the immortal gods and from you, senators, what do you think should be done about the innocent people? Although my role is more to gather the opinions of others than to give my own, I believe that, considering the Priverni are neighbors of the Samnites, with whom our peace is very uncertain, we should try to minimize any potential hostility between us and them."