**3.67** I understand that he expressed himself in this way:

"Even though I'm aware of no wrongdoing on my part, Quirites, I've come here before you in this assembly with immense shame. It's important for you to understand this and it should be recorded for future generations that the Aequians and Volscians, who were barely strong enough to fight our Hernician allies not long ago, came armed, with impunity, to the very walls of Rome, during this fourth consulate of myself, Titus Quinctius!"

"We have been living in such a way for a while now, given the situation, that positive news is a rarity these days. However, if I had known that such a giant disgrace was destined for this specific year, I'd have avoided this 'honor,' either by leaving the City in exile or by death, if there had been no other escape from office. If the enemy at our gates had been armed by real men, Rome could have been captured during my consulate. Truthfully, I've had enough honors. More than enough in life. I should have died during my third consulate."

"Whom do these most cowardly enemies scorn? We, the consuls, or you, Quirites? If the fault lies with us, remove us from command as unworthy individuals. If that isn't enough, impose further punishment on us. But if the fault lies with you, Quirites, may no god or man punish your offenses; you should only feel regret for them. These enemies didn't scorn your cowardice, nor did they trust in their own bravery. They have been defeated and chased away by you numerous times, stripped of their camps, deprived of their land, sent under the yoke, these enemies are familiar with both themselves and you."

"It was the conflict of the orders, the struggles between the patricians and the plebeians which have poisoned Rome and these disputes have emboldened our enemies. The enemies see we have no limits in our pursuit of power, nor you plebeians in your pursuit of freedom. And while you're weary of patrician magistrates, and we're weary of plebeian magistrates, this fight has allowed our enemies to become stronger."

"For heaven's sake, what do you all want? You yearned for plebeian tribunes, so we granted them for the sake of harmony. You desired decemvirs, so we allowed them to be appointed. You then grew tired of the decemvirs, so we forced them to resign. You remained angry at these same individuals when they became private citizens, so we allowed the most noble and honorable patrician men to die or go into exile. You wanted to appoint plebeian tribunes again and you did so. Although we recognized that it was unfair to the patricians to appoint consuls in your favor, we have even seen a patrician magistracy conceded as a gift to the plebeians."

"We have endured, and we continue to endure the tribunes' aid, the right of the people to appeal, the decrees of the plebeians made binding on the patricians all under the pretext of equalizing the laws, and the undermining of our privileges."

"When will our disagreements end? When will we be allowed to have a united City? When will we have one shared homeland? When defeated, we accept it with more grace than you do when victorious. Is it enough for us to fear you?"

"Against us the Aventine Hill was taken, the Sacred Mount was seized. The Esquiline Hill was almost captured by the enemy with the Volscians climbing the rampart. No one moved against the enemy. Yet, against us, you present yourselves as soldiers! Against us, you take up arms!"