**3.68** "You have stirred up trouble to the point where you have surrounded the Curia, turned the Forum into a battlefield, then filled the prison with the state's leading men. With that same fiery determination, you should march out through the Esquiline Gate, or if you're too scared to do that, just watch from the walls as your lands are destroyed by fire and sword! Watch the widespread looting! Watch as houses are set on fire with such intensity that there is smoke in every direction!"

"But, you might say, the community is worse off because of these actions: the land is burned, the City is under siege, and all the glory of the war is with the enemy. What about your own personal interests? Soon, each of you will hear about your own private losses from the lands. What do you have at home to make up for these losses? Will the tribunes give you back what you have lost?"

"The tribunes will give you plenty of words; accusations against the leading men, laws upon laws, and public meetings. However, from attending these meetings, none of you has ever returned home richer or more fortunate. Has anyone ever brought back anything to his wife and children except hatred, disputes, and public and private quarrels? Quarrels from which you have always been protected not by your own courage and honesty, but by the help of others?"

"But, by Hercules, when you were earning pay under us consuls, not under your tribunes, in the camps, not in the Forum, the enemy trembled at your battle cry, not the Roman patricians in the assembly. You used to return home to your family and household gods in triumph after gaining spoils, taking land from the enemy, and amassing wealth and glory, both public and private. Now, instead, you let the enemy leave with your property. You stay tied to your assemblies. You live in the Forum. The need to go to war, which you avoid, still follows you around. It was a heavy burden for you to march against the Aequians and the Volscians before. Well, now the war is at your doorstep. If it isn't pushed back from here, it'll soon be within the City walls, and will climb the Citadel and Capitoline Hill, and then follow you into your very homes."

"Two years ago, the Senate ordered a draft to be held, and the army to march to Algidum. Yet we sit at home, scolding each other like so many women and enjoying the present peace, not understanding that, after this brief peaceful break, complex wars are sure to return."

"I know there are many more pleasant topics than this one, but necessity forces me to speak the truth rather than what is convenient and pleasant even if my nature advises against it. I'd indeed like to please you, Quirites, but I'm much more concerned that you should be safe, no matter what you think of me. It's a fact of life that the person who speaks to a crowd in his own interest is more popular than the one who only has the public good in mind."

"That is, unless perhaps you think that those public flatterers, those plebeian agitators who neither let you go to war nor live in peace, stir you up for your own good. Because when you're stirred up, you promote their careers and add to their profit. These flatterers see that they aren't important to either side when the two different sides are in harmony, so they prefer to be leaders in chaos rather than nobodies in peace."

"If you're finally tired of this, and if you're willing to return to the customs of your ancestors and the Senate in place of these new ways, I'm willing to accept any punishment if within a few days I don't rout and put to flight these plunderers of our fields. I will strip their camps for spoils, and transfer this fear of war, which now has you paralyzed, away from our gates and walls to the cities of our enemies."