**3.69** Rarely has the speech of a popular tribune been better received by the plebeians than this speech, given by the strictest of consuls. The young men of military age, who usually used draft dodging as a weapon against the patricians during crises, began to look forward to arming themselves and going to war. The flight of the rural plebeians, their land being plundered, and the wounded, who brought reports worse than that which could be seen by the eyes, brought a sense of rage and revenge to the entire City.

When the Senate gathered, they all looked to Consul Quinctius as the sole defender of Roman majesty. The leading senators declared that his speech was worthy of his consular command, worthy of his many previous consulships, worthy of his life full of honors, and that, as much as he received these honors, he deserved them more often. Previous consuls had either tried to please the plebeians by betraying the dignity of the patricians or had made the plebeians more rebellious by harshly defending the rights of the patricians. However, Titus Quinctius gave a speech that respected the dignity of the Senate and promoted harmony among the different classes and was appropriate for the times.

He and his colleague, Consul Agrippa Furius, were urged to take the responsibility of the Republic. The tribunes were implored to unite with the consuls to keep the war away from the City and its walls, and to persuade the plebeians to obey and support the Senate in this dangerous crisis. And they appealed to the tribunes in the name of their shared heritage, begging for their help, with the countryside devastated and the City nearly besieged.

Everyone agreed that a draft was necessary, and it was held. The consuls announced that there was no time to consider excuses and that all men liable for service should report to the Campus Martius at dawn the next day. They would grant time after the war was completed to hear any reasons why anyone chose not to enlist. For those whose excuses weren't legitimate, they would be considered deserters and treated as such. The next day, all the young men showed up.

Each group of one hundred, a cohort, chose their own centurions, and two senators were put in charge of each cohort, as commanders. That very day, all these steps were taken so quickly, we are told, that the standards were brought from the treasury by the quaestors, carried onto the field, and by the fourth hour of the day, the new army, with a few cohorts of volunteer veteran soldiers following, started to move from the Campus Martius finally stopping at the tenth milestone to remain overnight.

The following day the enemy came into view, and the Romans joined their camp to the camp at Corbio.

On the third day, anger drove the Romans, while the enemy was driven by guilt at having rebelled so many times, and by despair; so no delay was made in fighting.