**3.71** The honorable victory the consuls had won over their enemies was soon tarnished by a shameful decision by the plebeians about their allies' borders. The states of Aricia and Ardea, who had often fought over a disputed piece of land, were tired from their many losses on both sides. Finally, weary of conflict, both states chose the Roman plebeians to decide who the land belonged to.

When they came to present their cases, a public meeting was arranged by the officials and a heated debate followed. After the witnesses had been produced and it was time for the tribes to be called and the people to vote, an elderly plebeian named Publius Scaptius stood up and said, "Consuls, if it's permitted for me to speak, I'll not let the plebeians be misled in this matter." The consuls shouted that he shouldn't be heard, claiming he was speaking to no purpose. He shouted that the public cause was being betrayed, but they ordered him to be removed. Scaptius then appealed to the tribunes.

The tribunes, who usually follow the crowd rather than lead it, allowed Publius Scaptius to speak because the plebeians wanted to hear him.

Scaptius began by stating that he was eighty-three years old, and he had served in the disputed area during his twentieth military campaign when war was being fought at Corioli. It had been forgotten over time but was still clear in his memory: the disputed land had belonged to Corioli, and after Corioli was captured, it became the public property of the Roman plebeians by right of war. He was surprised that the Ardeans and the Aricians thought they could take the land from the Roman plebeians, who they have now made the decision-makers, even though the plebeians had never claimed the land while Corioli was still standing.

He felt that he didn't have much time left to live, but he couldn't stop himself to allow the land, which he had helped to win as a soldier, be taken without protest using the only means he had left: his voice. He strongly advised the plebeians not to harm their own interests through useless shame.