**2.41** Spurius Cassius and Proculus Verginius were next appointed as consuls.

During this year, Rome defeated the Hernicians in battle and a treaty was struck with them, taking two-thirds of their land. Consul Cassius planned to divide half of this land among the Latins and the other half among the plebeians. To this, he also wanted to add a significant amount of public-owned land, which he claimed had been appropriated by private individuals. Cassius' plan worried many patricians, as they were the ones who had taken possession of those former public lands. The patricians were also concerned that Cassius' gift would give him too much influence among the people and threaten their freedom. This was the first time an Agrarian Law was suggested in Rome's history, a law that would always cause major societal upheaval whenever it was brought up, all the way to present day.

On the other hand, Consul Verginius opposed the land grants and, by doing so, was supported by the senators. Some plebeians were against it as they were offended that a gift of land would be given to foreign allies and not just Roman citizens. Verginius had warned the plebeians in meetings that Cassius' gift was dangerous and would lead to slavery for those who accepted it, implying that Cassius was trying to become a king. "What other reason is there," Verginius asked, "for including the Latin allies and restoring a third of the land to the Hernicians which we, ourselves, took from them? Were they not our enemies a short time ago? The reason is clear: these enemy tribes will have Cassius as their leader instead of Coriolanus." So Verginius, ironically, now became popular for opposing the Agrarian Law.

Both consuls tried to win the favor of the plebeians. Verginius agreed to distribute the lands, however, the lands would go only to Roman citizens. Cassius, who had lost popularity among his countrymen for trying to win over the allies by giving them land, tried to regain the plebeians' favor by distributing the money received for Sicilian grain sales to the plebeians, but the damage was already done. The plebeians rejected this offer of money as an outright bribe to take royal power. Their innate suspicion of anything that had to do with royal ambition was such that they rejected Cassius' gift as if they had plenty of money themselves.

All sources agree that after Cassius left office, he was immediately condemned and executed. Some sources say his father was the one who tried him at home, then had him whipped and executed. His son's private property was then consecrated to the goddess Ceres and proceeds were used to erect a statue in her honor that was inscribed "Given by the Family of Cassius". I find it easier to believe what others say, that he was tried for high treason by the quaestors, Caeso Fabius and Lucius Valerius, and was condemned by the people. His house, which stood on the open space in front of the Temple of Tellus, was torn down by public decree. Whether the trial was private or public, he was condemned during the consulship of Servius Cornelius Maluginensis and Quintus Fabius Vibulanus.
