**2.43** Quintus Fabius Vibulanus and Gaius Julius Iullus were next appointed as consuls. This year was marked by ongoing internal strife while foreign wars escalated. The Aequians took up arms and the Veientes began carrying out raids on Roman territory.

As the concern over these wars grew, the next year, they appointed Caeso Fabius Vibulanus, for the second time, and Spurius Furius Fusus as consuls.

The Aequians were besieging Ortona, a Latin city, and the Veientes, having plundered enough, threatened to lay siege to Rome itself. These threats only increased the tension among the plebeians. However, the practice of refusing military service was becoming more common, not by choice, but because Spurius Licinius, a plebeian tribune, believed it was time to force the Senate to pass the Agrarian Law. He took it upon himself to obstruct military preparations. However, his tribune colleagues disagreed with him and joined the consuls in helping them raise an army. Two armies were drafted for the two wars. One was led by Consul Fabius against the Aequians, and the other by Consul Furius against the Veientes. The war against the Veientes didn't yield any significant results.

In the campaign with the Aequi Fabius had more trouble with his own troops than with the enemy. He alone as Consul had held the state together, while the army, out of hatred for their commander, nearly betrayed the Republic. With his military skills and successful strategies, he routed the enemy's army by sending out his cavalry alone, but his infantry, out of spite, refused to pursue the scattered troops. Even when faced with their own disgrace at letting the enemy escape, and the potential danger that the Aequi might regroup and return, the infantry refused to speed up their pace or stand ready in battle formation. Without his orders, they bitterly returned to camp in a state of defeat, blaming him, and blaming the cavalry for following the commander's orders.

Consul Fabius did not even try correct this disastrous defiance of his men. So often, even the greatest minds have more talent for conquering enemies than for governing fellow citizens. The Consul returned to Rome not with honor gained in war but with the hatred of his soldiers towards him inflamed even further.

Despite this, the patricians kept the consulship within the Fabii family. They elected Marcus Fabius Vibulanus as Consul for the second time and assigned Gnaeus Manlius Cincinnatus as his colleague.