**1.49** Thus, Lucius Tarquinius started his reign. He was known as Superbus, the proud or arrogant, because he denied his father-in-law, King Servius, a proper burial, claiming that even King Romulus, the founder of Rome, didn't have one. He then executed the top senators he thought were loyal to Servius.

Tarquinius knew that others might try to take the crown from him the same ill-advised way that he did, so he was always surrounded by a body of armed men. While he made an issue of Servius not having the approval of the people when he became king, Tarquinius also didn't have the approval of the people or the Senate. His only claim to the throne was through violence.

Tarquinius had no hope of winning the affection of the people, so he ruled through fear. He judged serious crimes by himself, without any advisors, to spread that fear. It gave him the power to put anyone to death, exile them, or confiscate their property. He used his power not just upon those he suspected or disliked, but against anyone from whom he hoped to profit.

Naturally, the number of senators decreased. Tarquinius didn't replace them. It made the Senate, now weakened from its small numbers, seem more contemptible. The senators remaining were less likely to object to having no influence on him.

Tarquinius was the first king to ignore the tradition of consulting the Senate on all matters which had been handed down from his predecessors, and he administered the state by his own private counsel. He made and dissolved wars, peace, treaties, and alliances by himself, without the approval of the people or the Senate.

He then tried to win over the Latins so that, through foreign support, he could increase his security domestically among his own subjects. He made alliances with their leaders and even married his daughter to Octavius Mamilius of Tusculum, who was, by far, the most eminent leader of Latium, and, if we are to believe the tradition, who was believed to be a descendant of Ulysses and the goddess Circe. This marriage brought Tarquinius powerful and well-connected allies from Mamilius' family and friends.