**1.50** As his influence grew, Tarquinius eventually gained significant power among the leading men of the Latins. At one point, his power had grown so greatly that he called for a meeting of the Latins at the Ferentina Grove to discuss some important matters of mutual interest. Many of these leaders came from far away to gather at dawn for the meeting. Tarquinius, however, wasn't there. Instead, he arrived many hours later, just before sunset.

Throughout the day, however, as they waited, the Latin leaders talked over many matters among themselves. Turnus Herdonius from Aricia was the first to attack Tarquinius while he was absent. It was no surprise that people in Rome were calling him "Superbus" \[arrogant\] behind his back, he said. Could anything be more arrogant than to mock the whole Latin name this way? All these princes had been summoned to a location far from home, and the man who had called the council in the first place disrespected them all by not bothering to show up. In reality, he suggested, Tarquinius was testing their patience. If they accepted his rule, he could oppress them as dependents. Who could not see that he was aiming to impose his rule on the Latins?

If his own people had willingly entrusted him with power, or if he had gained it by election rather than seizing it through murder, then perhaps the Latins might be expected to accept him, even though he was still a foreigner. But if his own people now regret giving him power, given how some are killed one after the other, or others are driven into exile, and their property confiscated, they shouldn't expect better treatment as foreigners. He advocated going home and ignoring the meeting just like Tarquinius did.

While Turnus, known to be a rebellious and troublemaking leader, was saying these things, the discussion abruptly halted as Tarquinius arrived. Everyone turned to greet him. After they exchanged pleasantries, Tarquinius was urged by those nearest him to explain his late arrival. He was late, he explained, because he was chosen as a mediator to resolve a dispute between a father and a son and had delayed out of concern for reconciling them. Since that business had taken up the whole day, he promised to discuss the important matters the next day. Turnus could not keep his mouth shut without a challenge, saying that a dispute between a father and son should be relatively easy to resolve. It could be settled in a few words, and if the son does not obey the father, he will suffer the consequences.