**1.51** Turnus left the meeting, having expressed his concerns about Tarquinius. Though he appeared outwardly calm, Tarquinius immediately began plotting Turnus' death. He wanted to instill the same fear in the Latins that he had used to break the Romans. Since he couldn't openly kill Turnus, by virtue of his sovereign authority, he decided to falsely accuse him of a crime. Through certain opposing factions from Aricia, he bribed one of Turnus' servants with gold so that he would secretly allow a large number of swords to be hidden in Turnus' quarters.

When this had been accomplished during the night, Tarquinius summoned the Latin leaders a little before dawn and pretended to be alarmed by a strange event. It must have been divine intervention that made him late, he said, which saved himself and them because he had been told that Turnus had planned to attack them all during the previous day's meeting so that he might seize control over the Latins. Instead, Turnus postponed it because the person who called the meeting, himself, his primary target, was absent. That was the reason for Turnus' aggressive speech in his absence, because his plan was canceled by the delay. Tarquinius then said he had no doubt that, if the reports were true, Turnus would arrive at the morning's council armed and with a band of conspirators. The source also claimed that a large number of swords had been smuggled into Turnus' quarters to carry out the plot. Whether this was true or not could be easily proven, he said, and asked the Latin leaders to accompany him to Turnus' quarters so that they might verify these claims.

The leaders were skeptical of Tarquinius' claims. However, they also thought it was strange that Turnus, who was known for a fiery temper, made an extremely negative speech the day before and that Tarquinius' delay now seemed to have prevented the assassination. They agreed to go but considered these claims to be false unless they found the existence of the swords.

When they arrived at Turnus' quarters, they surrounded him with guards and woke him up. Turnus' servants tried to defend their master out of loyalty, but they were restrained. When the hidden swords were found in many parts of his quarters, the matter was clearly seen, and Turnus was immediately arrested.

A meeting of the Latins was immediately called amidst great confusion. At the meeting, the swords were displayed prominently for all to see. The mere sight of them stirred up such intense anger among the leaders that Turnus wasn't allowed to defend himself.

In a unique form of execution, he was thrown into the Ferentina water reservoir, covered with a frame of wood, and drowned by stones thrown on top of it.