**1.53** King Tarquinius was a harsh ruler during peaceful times, but he wasn't a weak military leader. He could have been as good as his predecessors if his degeneracy in other aspects hadn't overshadowed his abilities. He was the first to fight against the Volsci, a fight that continued for two-hundred years after his reign. He successfully captured an important Volscian city, Suessa Pometia, and sold the spoils to gather forty talents of silver. With this wealth, he planned to build a grand temple for Jupiter that would be worthy of the king of gods and men, worthy of the Roman empire, and worthy of the majesty of the place upon which it would be built. He set aside the war booty to fund the temple's construction.

However, a more challenging war soon came his way. He tried to capture Gabii, a nearby city, by force, and failed. He then laid siege to it but was unsuccessful. When he couldn't take the walls by force, he resorted to deceit and fraud, which wasn't a typical Roman tactic. Acting as if the war had ended, he pretended to be busy with laying the foundations of the temple and other urban projects. Tarquinius then ordered his son Sextus Tarquinius, who was the youngest of the three, to pretend to flee to Gabii claiming he could no longer endure his father's cruelty.

Sextus did as he was told. After he arrived, he confided to the Gabians that his father was cruel, even to his own family. That his father was also weary of the company of his children and was planning to destroy his own household in the same way as he had emptied the Senate of its members, so that he would leave no descendants, and no heir to the throne. There was no choice, Sextus said, he had indeed escaped the arrows and swords of his father, believing there was nowhere safe except among the enemies of Lucius Tarquinius.

He then warned the Gabians not to be fooled, that his father hadn't given up the war. He was just pretending a false peace. His father would attack again when they least expect it. If they couldn't offer him refuge, he would be forced to wander through all Latium, and from there he would seek help from the Volscians, the Aequians, or the Hernicians until he reached those who knew how to protect their children from the cruel and impious punishments of their fathers. Perhaps he would find some group with a passion for war and arms willing to rise against the most arrogant king and the most violent people.

When he seemed ready to leave in anger if they refused him shelter, the Gabians warmly welcomed him with kindness. They said that, as his father was towards his people, and as he was towards his allies, it was no wonder that he would ultimately be so savage towards his children. They thought that Tarquinius Superbus would eventually burn out and turn his anger on himself if he ran out of targets.

But they were glad of Sextus' arrival and believed that it would soon be possible, with his help, to transfer the war from the gates of Gabii to the walls of Rome.