**2.44** In this year, a plebeian tribune named Tiberius Pontificius proposed an Agrarian Law.

He also did what Spurius Licinius had done before: he managed to delay the military draft for a short period. The senators were once again confused, but Appius Claudius argued that the tribunes' power had been defeated the previous year, and that it could possibly happen now, and potentially in the future, since it had been discovered that the office could be dissolved by pitting its own members against each other. He argued that there would always be at least one tribune who would want to gain a personal victory over the others and would want to gain favor with the more influential party by promoting the public good. Multiple tribunes would be ready to support the consuls, if needed, but even just one could be enough to counter all the others.

The solution, he said, was kindness. He urged the consuls and leading senators to win over some, if not all, of the tribunes to the side of the City and the Senate. The senators and the entire assembly, persuaded by Appius' advice, began treating the tribunes with respect and courtesy, kindly making their appeal for what was beneficial to the state.

Former consuls, by using their personal influence, partly by friendliness and partly by authority, were able to sway some of the tribunes. Then, with the help of four plebeian tribunes against the one, whom they claimed was obstructing the public good, the consuls were able to complete the draft of men for the army.

The consuls then led the army to war against Veii. Support was gathered from all the Etruscans, not out of concern for Veii but because they hoped that Rome would be torn apart by their internal conflict. In the councils of all the Etruscan states, the leaders openly complained that Rome's power would last forever unless they were torn apart by internal strife. This was the one poison, the one downfall for wealthy states which made great empires mortal.

This sickness had been endured for a long time partly through the leadership of the senators and partly through the patience of the plebeians. Now, it had come to a breaking point. Two cities had been made from one, with each party having its own magistrates and its own laws. While the Romans had always been rebellious during the draft to gather soldiers for war, once drafted, they had always obeyed their commanders. Regardless of what was happening inside the City, if military discipline could be maintained, Rome could withstand any conflict. However, now the custom of not obeying the magistrates was following the Roman soldier into the camp.

In their latest war, when the army was ready for battle, at the very instant of conflict, they handed over the victory to the conquered Aequians. The Romans deserted their standards, left their general on the field, and had returned to camp without orders. The Etruscans knew, if they persisted, that they could defeat Rome by using its own soldiers against them. All they needed to do was declare war; they believed that fate and the gods would take care of the rest. This hope led the Etruscans, who had experienced many victories and defeats fighting against Rome, to take up arms.