**3.23** While these events were happening in Antium, the Aequians sent their strongest young men to attack and capture the Tusculum citadel at night. The rest of the Aequian army halted and set up camp not far from Tusculum's walls in order to stretch out the Roman forces. When news of this reached Rome and then Antium, the Romans were as shocked as if they had heard their own Capitoline Hill had been taken.

The Tusculans had recently helped them, and the similar danger they now faced seemed to demand a return of that aid. Consul Fabius quickly moved all the goods they had taken from the Volscians' camp to Antium. He left a small garrison of soldiers to guard Antium, then rushed the rest of his army to Tusculum. The soldiers were only allowed to bring their weapons and any cooked food that was at hand. Consul Cornelius sent more supplies from Rome.

The ensuing war in Tusculum went on for several months. With one part of the army laying siege to the Aequian camp, Consul Fabius lent another part of the army to the Tusculans to help them take back their citadel. The Tusculans couldn't storm it by direct assault. In time, however, the Aequians were forced to leave the citadel because they were starving. When the end came, the Tusculans made the Aequians walk under a yoke, unarmed and naked, as a sign of defeat. As the Aequians shamefully fled home, they were overtaken by Consul Fabius on Mount Algidus and were all killed, leaving no survivors.

After this victory, Consul Fabius moved his army back to Columen, that is the name of the place, and set up camp. Consul Cornelius, after the enemy had now been driven from the Roman walls and the danger had ceased, left Rome himself. The two consuls then entered enemy territory from two different directions, and each tried to outdo the other in inflicting great damage: Volscians on the one side and the Aequians on the other.

Some historians say that the people of Antium rebelled that same year. They claim that Consul Lucius Cornelius led the war and recaptured the town. However, I can't confirm this because the older records don't mention it.