**3.24** Immediately after the war had ended, a political conflict within the City caused concern for the Senate. The tribunes claimed that the army was kept abroad dishonestly, under false pretenses, with the intention of frustrating the passage of the Terentillian Law. Regardless, the tribunes vowed to continue their efforts. Lucius Lucretius, the City's prefect, managed to delay the tribunes' actions until the consuls returned.

Another issue emerged when Aulus Cornelius and Quintus Servilius, the quaestors, set a trial date for Marcus Volscius. He was accused of providing false testimony against Caeso Quinctius. Evidence showed that Volscius' brother, who was supposedly attacked by Caeso, had been bedridden due to a long-term illness. He hadn't been seen in public since he became ill, had never gotten out of bed from his illness, and died from wasting away over a number of months. Furthermore, Caeso wasn't in Rome at the time of the alleged crime, as confirmed by his fellow soldiers who stated that he was quartered with them and hadn't had a leave of absence. If this was the case, many men privately claimed they would judge Volscius guilty. Since Volscius dared not go to trial, all the facts converging together made the conviction of Volscius as certain as Caeso's was by Volscius' false testimony.

The tribunes delayed the proceedings and refused to allow the quaestors to proceed against Volscius, insisting that the Terentillian Law must be addressed before the trial could take place. This resulted in both issues being postponed until the arrival of the consuls. When the consuls entered the City in Triumph with the victorious army, many believed the tribunes were intimidated into silence about the Terentillian Law. However, since it was the end of the year, the tribunes were instead focused on securing a fourth term and shifted their efforts from the Terentillian Law toward the discussion of the elections. Despite the consuls' efforts to oppose the continuation of the tribunate just as much as they would have opposed the passing of a law to diminish their own authority, the tribunes won the election.

That same year, peace was granted to the Aequi, who requested it.

The census, which had begun the previous year, was completed, and the lustrum purification ritual was then performed. It was said to have been the tenth lustrum since the beginning of the City. The numbers from the census amounted to one hundred seventeen thousand three hundred nineteen citizens.

Praised for their achievements both in war and at home, the consuls managed to maintain peace both domestically and abroad. Despite some discord, the state was less troubled than in previous times.