**3.25** Lucius Minucius for the second time, and Gaius Nautius Rutilus were elected as the next consuls.

The consuls inherited two unresolved issues from the previous year. As was before, the consuls were against the Terentillian Law, while the tribunes opposed the trial of Volscius. However, the new quaestors held more power and greater authority.

Marcus Valerius, son of Manius Valerius and grandson of Volesus Valerius, was appointed quaestor alongside Titus Quinctius Capitolinus, who had been consul three times. Quaestor Quinctius couldn't restore Caeso Quinctius, one of the greatest of the young men of the Republic, and return him to the Quinctian family or to Rome. Instead, he waged a just and pious war on Volscius for being a false witness who had stripped an innocent man of the right to defend himself.

Tribune Verginius was the most active in pushing for the Terentillian Law to be passed. The consuls were given two months to investigate the measure and inform the plebeians about any secret fraud being committed. The consuls would then allow them to vote. This delay brought peace to the City.

However, the Aequians didn't let them rest for long.

The Aequians broke the treaty they had made with the Romans the previous year and appointed Cloelius Gracchus as their chief commander, a prominent figure among the Aequians. Under Gracchus' command, the Aequians attacked the district of Labicum, then Tusculum with a hostile raid, and set up their camp at Algidum full of stolen goods.

Former consuls Quintus Fabius, Publius Volumnius, and Aulus Postumius served as ambassadors from Rome, going to the Aequian camp to protest the attacks and demand restitution according to the treaty. General Gracchus ordered the Roman ambassadors to deliver their message from the Senate to an oak tree; he, in the meantime, would be engaged in more important matters. The oak, a massive tree, loomed over the General's headquarters and in its shadow was a shady seat. Then one of the ambassadors, while departing, said, "May this sacred oak, and whatever gods there may be, hear how you have broken the treaty! May the gods support our complaints now and our weapons later when we avenge the simultaneous violation of the rights of gods and men."

When the envoys returned to Rome, the Senate ordered one of the consuls to march his army against General Gracchus at Algidum. The other consul was tasked with plundering Aequian land. The tribunes, as was their custom, tried to stop the recruitment of soldiers, and they might have succeeded if not for a sudden new threat.