**3.28** After riding around and surveying the enemy camp to understand its layout as much as possible in the darkness, the Dictator ordered the military tribunes to instruct the soldiers to throw down their baggage in one place and then return back to their positions with their weapons and stakes. The orders were carried out promptly. Then, maintaining the order in which they had been on the road, he surrounded the enemy's camp in a long column. He instructed them that, at a given signal, the troops should all shout, and, after shouting, every man should dig a trench in front of his own position and use his stakes, thereby erecting a palisaded rampart. Shortly after issuing these orders, the signal was given. The soldiers did as they were told and began building, their shouts echoing around the enemy blockade and reaching Consul Minucius' camp.

In the enemy camp, there was immediate panic. However, in the Minucius' camp they began to rejoice, excitedly reassuring each other that help was on the way and began to intimidate the enemy from their watch posts, using sorties to harass them. Consul Minucius declared that there was no time to waste. He believed that the shout not only signaled the arrival of their fellow citizens, but that he would be surprised if the enemy camp wasn't already under attack from the outside. Minucius ordered his men to arm themselves and follow him immediately.

Consul Minucius began the battle that night. The shouts of the Dictator's legions signaled that they were also beginning their fight, as well. As the Aequians were busy trying to stop the construction of the circumvallation surrounding them by Cincinnatus' army, Consul Minucius' army burst out of their camp and started to battle. The Aequians, taken by surprise, then shifted their focus from the Romans on the outer fortifications back to the Romans inside the camp to prevent a breakout through the middle of their camp. In this way, Minucius' constant distractions allowed the work on the outer fortifications to continue, uninterrupted, throughout the night. The Aequians were kept occupied by Consul Minucius until dawn.

At daybreak, the Aequians found themselves surrounded by the Dictator's fortifications on one side and were barely able to hold off Minucius' army on the other side. Cincinnatus' army, having completed their work, immediately returned to their weapons and attacked. Now the Aequians were facing danger from two sides, and neither side was letting up.

The stress of being attacked on both sides was too much, so the Aequians stopped fighting and resorted to pleading, first to the Dictator and then to the Consul, that they not make the price of victory to be their extermination. Instead, they asked to please allow them to surrender their weapons and leave. Consul Minucius ordered them to go to Dictator Cincinnatus.

Cincinnatus was enraged. In his anger, he was determined to humiliate them. He ordered that Cloelius Gracchus, their general, and other high-ranking leaders, be brought to him in chains, and to evacuate the town of Corbio. The Dictator said he didn't want the blood of the Aequians, but rather a confession from them that they had been defeated and subdued. He ordered them to pass under the yoke, a symbol of submission made of three spears, two planted in the ground and one tied across the top. The Dictator sent the Aequians under this yoke and allowed them to depart.