**3.29** The Aequian camp was found to be stocked full of supplies left behind as the Dictator had sent the Aequians away naked. Cincinnatus distributed all the spoils to his own soldiers, since they had been ordered to leave Rome so quickly and with very little.

He criticized Consul Minucius' army and the consul himself, saying, "Soldiers, you won't receive any part of the spoils taken from the enemy who nearly defeated you. And you, Lucius Minucius, until you show the spirit of a consul, you'll command these legions as a legate." Minucius resigned his position as Consul and stayed with the army, as ordered.

The army at that time were very obedient to authority, especially when it was combined with superior leadership. Remembering Dictator Cincinnatus' kindness more than their disgrace, they awarded him a golden crown weighing a pound and, as he departed, hailed him as their protector.

The Senate, convened by former consul Quintus Fabius, now the City prefect, decreed that Cincinnatus should enter Rome in a Triumph procession with his troops that accompanied him. The defeated Aequian leaders were paraded before his chariot, the military standards were carried on ahead, and after that his army followed, laden with spoils. It's said that tables with food were set out in front of all the houses, and the soldiers, feasting as they marched, followed the chariot, singing songs of victory and making solemn jokes as revelers do.

On that day, Lucius Mamilius of Tusculum, who had raised an army to rescue the embattled Romans several years earlier when the Capitoline Hill was taken, was granted citizenship, to universal approval. \[This was the first recorded granting of citizenship for service to Rome.\]

Dictator Cincinnatus would have resigned his position, but he was kept in office for the trial of Marcus Volscius, the false witness. In awe of Cincinnatus, the tribunes didn't interfere this time. Volscius was found guilty and exiled to Lanuvium. Afterward, Cincinnatus resigned his position on the sixteenth day, even though it had been granted to him for six months.

During this time, Consul Nautius fought a brilliant battle with the Sabines at Eretum with great success. So, in addition to the destruction of their lands, the Sabines suffered another blow.

Former consul Quintus Fabius was sent to Algidum to replace Lucius Minucius.

Toward the end of the year, the tribunes began to discuss the Terentillian Law, but because two armies were abroad, the Senate decided that no business should be proposed to the plebeians. The plebeians managed to elect the same tribunes for the fifth time.

It's reported that wolves seen on the Capitoline Hill were chased away by dogs, and because of this omen, the Capitoline Hill was purified.

These were the events of that year.