**3.40** While Marcus Horatius was calling them out like this, the decemvirs were paralyzed with indecision about which reaction they could afford to make. Should they be angry and resistant or simply overlook what was being said? They couldn't predict the outcome of the situation.

During this time, Gaius Claudius, the uncle of Appius Claudius, the decemvir, made a speech that sounded more like a prayer than an argument. He asked Appius, by the spirits of his brother and Appius' father, to remember the civil society he was born into, rather than the dishonest agreement he had made with his colleagues. Gaius Claudius made this plea more for Appius' sake than for the good of the City. He believed the City would fight for its rights with or without the decemvirs' cooperation. He warned that great conflicts often lead to great anger and it was outcome from that anger that he worried about.

Even though the decemvirs ordered the Senate to only discuss the topic they had presented, they respected Gaius Claudius too much to interrupt him. He ended his speech by offering a resolution that no decree should be passed by the Senate. Everyone understood this to mean that Claudius considered the decemvirs to be private citizens. Many of the consular rank verbally agreed with him.

Another suggestion was made that seemed harsher but was less effective. It called for the patricians to gather to elect an interrex. By making any decision, they acknowledged that the decemvirs who called the Senate meeting were some sort of magistrates; whereas the decemvirs had been rated as mere citizens when Claudius suggested that no decision should be made.

With the decemvirs' cause already collapsing, Lucius Cornelius Maluginensis, the brother of Decemvir Marcus Cornelius, and one of the ex-consuls who was saved for last among the consular men to end the debate, began to speak. He defended his brother and his colleagues by pretending to care about the war.

Cornelius wondered why the decemvirs were being attacked by the very men who had sought that office. Why had no one raised any objections for so many months when the city had been empty, and no leaders or lawful magistrates had presided over important affairs? Why were they causing political conflict now as to who the lawful magistrates were, when the enemy was almost at the gate? Unless, of course, they thought that in the current danger, their actions would be less noticeable. Couldn't it wait until later, during the many months when the state wasn't busy, since such important questions can't be judged while minds are preoccupied with greater matters?

The issue Lucius Valerius and Marcus Horatius raised, alleging that the decemvirs had left office before the fifteenth of May, should be discussed in the Senate after the impending wars were over and peace had been restored. Appius Claudius should be prepared to explain the election of the decemvirs, whether they were elected for one year or until the missing laws were approved.

All other issues should be put aside for now, except for the war, he said. If they believed the reports about the war were false and that not only messengers but also Tusculan ambassadors had brought inaccurate news, they should send scouts to get more accurate information. If they believed the reports and the ambassadors, they should start recruiting soldiers as soon as possible. The decemvirs should lead the armies wherever they thought was best. No other issue should be more important than this one.