**3.41** The younger senators prevailed in support of this proposal.

But Valerius and Horatius, with increased intensity, loudly demanded the right to speak about public matters. They threatened to go straight to the public if they weren't allowed speak in the Senate through partisan obstruction or conspiracy. Private individuals, whether in the Senate or in the assembly, couldn't stop them, and they wouldn't give in to the fasces of an imaginary authority. Appius Claudius interrupted the outbursts, realizing that he needed to fight back with equal intensity as his authority was in jeopardy. "It'll be better," he said, "to not speak about any subject except the one we're considering now." He ordered a lictor to approach Valerius, who was declaring he would not allow a private citizen to silence him.

Valerius ran to the threshold of the Senate, imploring the Quirites to protect him. Lucius Cornelius immediately got up and threw his arms around Appius, pretending to side with Valerius and thus broke up the dispute. At Cornelius' request, Lucius Valerius was allowed to speak his mind, but this freedom didn't go beyond the walls of the Senate, and the decemvirs achieved their goal.

Despite their issues with the decemvirs, the consulars and elder senators still resented the power of the tribunes. They saw that the plebeians desired the tribunes' power more than the consuls' power. The consulars and elder senators preferred that the decemvirs voluntarily give up their office in the future rather than the hatred of them should lead to an another uprising by the plebeians. They hoped that if the issue were handled gently, it might return the consuls to power without public unrest. The plebeians then might forget their tribunes, either due to wars or the consuls' moderate use of their power.

A draft was announced with no objection of the Senate. Since the government held power without the right of appeal against the command, the young men responded to their names.

After enlisting the legions, the decemvirs decided who would lead the armies and who would protect the City. The most influential decemvirs were Quintus Fabius and Appius Claudius. These two decemvirs faced a more significant conflict at home than abroad.

It was thought that Appius Claudius' violence was better suited to quell disturbances in the City. They chose Spurius Oppius to assist Appius Claudius in protecting the City, with authority to coordinate with equal authority among all the decemvirs.

Quintus Fabius' character was seen as being more inclined to evil pursuits than good ones. He was once a distinguished leader both domestically and in the military, but the decemvirate and bad influence from his colleagues had changed him to be more like Appius rather than himself. He was given the war against the Sabines, with colleagues Manius Rabuleius and Quintus Poetelius accompanying him. Marcus Cornelius was sent to Algidum with Lucius Menucius, Titus Antonius, Caeso Duillius, and Marcus Sergius.