**3.42** The military operations were no more successful in the wars with the Sabines and Aequians than domestic administration was. The only mistake made by the decemvirs was that they had made themselves despised by their fellow citizens.

Otherwise, the blame rested entirely with the soldiers. The soldiers allowed themselves to be defeated to ensure that no mission would succeed under the leadership of the decemvirs, to their own humiliation and that of the decemvirs. The Roman armies were defeated by the Sabines at Eretum and by the Aequians at Algidum.

After fleeing from Eretum under the cover of night, the Romans arrived at a previously fortified camp between Fidenae and Crustumerium, closer to Rome. The Roman soldiers didn't engage the Sabines who pursued them, but instead fortified the camp using the natural advantages of the high ground and entrenchments to protect them, not their courage or weapons.

In Algidum, the Romans suffered greater humiliation and defeat by the Aequians, even going so far as to lose their camp. The Roman soldiers, devoid of all their equipment, sought refuge in Tusculum, relying on the goodwill and mercy of their hosts for survival, which they did receive. The news that reached Rome was so alarming that, with their hatred for the decemvirs set aside, the senators decided to keep watch in the City. They ordered all those of suitable age to carry arms to stand guard on the City walls and establish outposts at the gates. The senators also decided to send for weapons and reinforcements from Tusculum and for the soldiers to leave the Tusculum citadel and rejoin the troops encamped.

The other camp was to be moved from Fidenae into Sabine territory. The hope was that, by striking first, the Sabines would be discouraged from planning an attack on the City.