**1.47** The later years of King Servius were filled with increasing deceit and danger. Tarquinius' ambitious new wife turned her mind from one crime to another constantly pushing him and didn't allow him any peace, day or night lest the murders they had already committed proved to be in vain. Tullia didn't want a husband she could simply live with quietly; she wanted a man who believed he was worthy of the throne, who remembered he was King Tarquin's son, and would rather rule a kingdom than merely just hope for it. Tullia said to him:

"If you're the man to whom I thought I was married, then I'll call you my husband and my king. However, if not, then I've changed my condition for the worse because you aren't just a coward but a criminal, as well."

"Why don't you prepare yourself for action? Unlike your father, you aren't a native of Corinth or Tarquinii. You don't have a foreign crown you need to win. Your father's household gods, your father's image, the royal palace, the kingly throne within it, the very name of Tarquinius – all of these declare you king."

"If you don't have enough courage for this, why indulge your empty hopes here? Why do you allow yourself to be looked down upon as merely a prince? Make your way back to Tarquinii or Corinth. Slink back to the place from where you came. You have your brother's nature. Not your father's."

She constantly prodded him with such words, frustrated that Tanaquil, a foreign woman, could act as kingmaker and secure two successive thrones both for her husband and son-in-law while she, of royal blood, had no influence in granting or taking away a kingdom.

Driven by this relentless pushing, Tarquinius began to seek the support of the senators, particularly younger ones from less prestigious families. He reminded them of his father's kindness and asked for their loyalty in return. Tarquinius won over the young men with gifts, promising great things about himself while taking every opportunity to criticize King Servius.

When the time was right to strike, he stormed into the Forum with a group of armed men and, while everyone watched in fear, he sat on the throne in front of the Curia Hostilia. Then, he ordered a messenger to summon the senators to attend a meeting with King Tarquinius. They gathered quickly; some had prepared for this, others attended out of fear of the consequences of not attending. The senators were astonished by the novelty and amazed by Tarquinius, believing that Servius had already been dealt with.

On the throne, Tarquinius began to speak out against Servius, starting with his lineage. He criticized him for being a slave and the son of a slave woman. He accused him of seizing the throne after the disgraceful death of his predecessor, King Tarquin, without any interregnum, without elections being held, without a vote from the people or the Senate's approval, but as a gift from a woman, Tanaquil!

This man, born and made king this way, a supporter of the lowest class of people from which he came, had robbed the nobles of their land and divided it amongst the poorest people out of hatred of the others' nobility. He had placed all the burdens of society which had once been shared by all, on the wealthy. He created the census that made the wealth of the rich visible such that people became jealous of them, and made it an easily available source for Servius to shower handouts on the poor and needy whenever he wished.