**1.48** When King Servius heard the alarming news from an out-of-breath messenger, he rushed to the Senate, shouting from the steps of the vestibule while Tarquinius was speaking. "Tarquinius, what is this?" he screamed. "With what audacity have you dared to summon the senators or sit on my throne while I'm still alive?"

Tarquinius angrily snapped back at him that he was the son of King Tarquin and a better successor than a slave like himself. He accused Servius of playing a reckless game and disrespecting his masters long enough with his lawless rule. A shouting arose among the supporters of both men, and a crowd of people rushed into the Senate. It was clear that whoever won this fight would become the next king.

Now forced by necessity to dare to continue to the end, Tarquinius, who was much younger and stronger, seized Servius around the waist and threw him down from the steps of the Curia and into the lower part of the Forum. He then returned inside to convene the senators.

Servius' companions and attendants immediately fled. Servius himself, now losing blood, was killed as he tried to return back to the palace without his terrified royal entourage. The killers had been sent by Tarquinius who pursued him as he fled.

Some sources believe that Tullia advised him to finish off her father like this, though all sources agree that she drove her chariot into the Forum, and not respecting the assembly of men, she called her husband out of the Curia and was the first to call him king. Ordered by him to leave amid the chaos, she was returning home and reached the top of Cyprium Street, where the Temple of Diana had been until recently. The cart was turning to the right up the slope of Clivum Urbium Street ascending up the Esquiline Hill, when her driver, frightened, stopped and held back the reins, then showed the lady the murdered Servius lying there. A foul and inhuman crime is reported to have happened there. The place became a monument to the horror, and they called it Sceleratus Street or the Street of Crime.

It's said that Tullia, driven to madness by the furies of her sister and former husband, drove her chariot over her father's corpse. Then, Tullia, now contaminated and spattered with his blood, carried part of his blood and slaughter in the blood-stained chariot, taking it to her own and her husband's household gods, who, being angered by the evil beginning of his reign would soon bring about a similar downfall.

King Servius Tullius had reigned for forty-four years in a way that would be hard for even a good and moderate successor to match. Yet his glory was further enhanced by the fact that the end of his reign marks the end of just and lawful kingship in Rome. Some sources say Servius was even considering resigning his position just to liberate his countrymen, so gentle and moderate was his rule, but his family's wickedness interfered with his plans.