**2.38** As they moved forward, leaving Rome in a nearly unbroken stream, Tullius went ahead and arrived at the top of the Ferentinum Road. He greeted each of the Volscian leaders as they arrived with their groups, asking questions and expressing his outrage. Their outrage reflected his own. While they listened attentively to his further words of anger, he guided those who felt the same, who, in turn, guided their groups, into a nearby field lying below the road. There, he began a speech as if it were a public address:

Tullius said, "Even if you were to forget the past wrongs done by the Roman people and the disasters that fell upon the Volscian nation, how can you tolerate this latest insult given to you today when they began their games by mocking us? Didn't you feel that they were celebrating a victory over you? That you, when leaving, were a spectacle for all to see, by the citizens, by the foreigners, and by so many neighboring states? That your wives and your children were paraded in front of the crowd? What do you think those who heard the herald's announcements thought about us? What about those who saw us picking up and leaving? Or those who encountered our shameful procession home? What else could they think, except that we've committed some terrible crime that would taint the games and provoke the gods' displeasure? This is the reason, in their minds, why we were banished from their company and gatherings."

"Doesn't it occur to you that we're alive only because we left quickly? That is, if this can even be called leaving and not what it really was: fleeing. Don't you see this as a city of enemies, where if you had stayed even one more day, you would have all been killed? War has been declared on you! It'll be a great misfortune for those who declared it, if you are men!"

Already filled with resentment and inflamed even more by this speech, they each went back home, bringing the anger back to their own townspeople who also became outraged. In no time, the entire Volscian nation was livid, ready to rise up in revolt against Rome.