**2.39** The Volscian generals unanimously chosen for the war were Attius Tullius and Gnaeus Marcius Coriolanus, the Roman exile. They placed their greatest hope in Coriolanus. He didn't let them down, proving that the strength of Rome lay more in its generals than its army.

He led his troops to Circeii, drove out the Roman colonists, and gave the city back to the Volscians as a free city. Coriolanus then moved across the countryside, taking from the Romans their newly won towns of Satricum, Longula, Polusca, and Corioli, which he, himself, had recently captured for the Romans. He recaptured Lavinium and using back roads on the Latin Way, took Corbio, Vitellia, Trebia, Labici, and Pedum. Finally, he marched from Pedum to Rome, setting up his camp at the Cluilian Trenches five miles from the City. From there, he raided the Roman territory, but he sent guards with the raiders to make sure the lands of the senators weren't touched.

This could have been because Coriolanus was more hostile to the plebeians, or because, strategically, he wanted to cause conflict between the senators and the plebeians. The conflict would certainly have arisen since the plebeian tribunes were stirring up the plebeians against Rome's leaders, accusing them of colluding with the enemy. But fear of the enemy kept them united even though they continued to be suspicious and hostile with one another. The only disagreement was that the Senate and consuls wanted to use military force, while the plebeians wanted to avoid war.

Spurius Nautius and Sextus Furius were voted in as the next consuls.

In this year, the consuls were organizing the legions and setting up guards along the walls and other strategic points when a large crowd demanding peace scared them with loud protests. They were then forced to call a Senate meeting to discuss sending Roman ambassadors to Coriolanus. The Senate agreed to this when they saw that the plebeians' morale was fading.

Ambassadors were sent to Coriolanus to discuss peace, but they returned with a harsh response from him: if the territory taken by the Romans were restored to the Volscians, the question of peace could be discussed. But if Rome thought they could enjoy the spoils of war while living in peace, they would find he hadn't forgotten the wrongs inflicted upon him by the Romans nor the kindness shown by the Volscians who were now his hosts. He would make it clear that his spirit had been strengthened, not broken, by being exiled.

When the same ambassadors were sent back a second time, they weren't allowed into the camp. It's said that the fetial priests, dressed in their ceremonial robes, also went to the enemy's camp to plead for peace, but they had no more influence on him than the ambassadors.