**2.40** Then the matrons of Rome gathered in large numbers and went to the home of Veturia, the mother of Coriolanus, and his wife, Volumnia. It's unclear to me whether this was due to a public decision or from the women's fear. Regardless, they succeeded in their plan, for both Veturia, an elderly woman now, and Volumnia were to take the two young sons of Coriolanus and enter the enemy camp. As the men were powerless to protect the City by their weapons, the women desired to do so by their tears and prayers.

Upon their arrival at the camp, Coriolanus was informed of an immense number of women standing nearby. Being unmoved by the state's ambassadors and the priests' religious appeals, he was even more resistant to the women's tears. However, when one of his relatives recognized his mother, Veturia, who was standing among the others in a state of great sadness, he pointed her out to Coriolanus and said, "Unless my eyes are deceiving me," he said, "your mother is here along with your wife and children."

Coriolanus, shocked, rushed to embrace his mother. But Veturia, instead of accepting his warm welcome, angrily spoke to him:

"Before I accept your hug, are you my enemy or are you my son? Am I a prisoner of war in your camp or am I your mother? Has long life and an unhappy old age brought me to this, that I should see you both exiled and then an enemy?"

"Could you bring yourself to destroy and plunder the City which gave you life and raised you? Couldn't you release that anger, no matter how hostile you felt when you came, as you passed the boundary to come here? Didn't you think to yourself, 'Within these walls are my home and my gods, my mother, my wife, and my children' as the City stood right in front of your eyes?"

"Therefore, if I had not given birth, Rome would not have been besieged! If I had no son, I'd have died a free woman, in a free land! I can't suffer anything worse that would be more disgraceful to you or more miserable for myself than what I'm suffering now. I'm deeply sorrowful, but my own sorrows will soon be over. The next generation of young people will be the ones killed or enslaved if you continue what you began."

This speech, the embraces of his wife and children, and the tears of the Roman women, weeping for their birth and their City, were too much. Coriolanus' resolve was broken, and he embraced his loved ones and then sent them home.

He then moved his camp away from the City. After leading his army from Roman territory, it's poetically said that Coriolanus died overwhelmed by the resentment that this act caused; however, his actual cause of his death varies among different sources. According to Fabius, the most ancient author, Coriolanus lived until an old age and would say, in his advanced age, that exile was far worse for an old man.

The men of Rome praised the women for their actions, such was the time where envy had no place. A temple was built in honor of the female Fortuna Muliebris, goddess of luck and good fortune, to serve as a memorial of their deed. The Volscians later returned to Roman territory with the Aequians, but the Aequians refused to have Attius Tullius as their leader. This led to a dispute between the two armies as to who should be the leader, and it grew into a fierce battle. The Roman people were indeed fortunate: both enemy armies in their stubborn struggle defeated each other.

Next, Titus Sicinius and Gaius Aquillius were made consuls.

Sicinius was assigned the province of the Volscians, and Aquillius that of the Hernicians as they, too, had taken up arms. That year, the Hernicians were defeated, but the conflict with the Volscians ended inconclusively, with neither side gaining the upper hand.