**4.8** The previous year, whether it only had consular tribunes or consuls replacing those consular tribunes, was followed by a year in which consuls were definitely present. These consuls were Marcus Geganius Macerinus for the second time and Titus Quinctius Capitolinus for the fifth time.

This year also marked the beginning of the censorship, an institution that started humbly but later grew in such significance that it became responsible for regulating the morals and discipline of Rome. The honor and disgrace of the senators, centuries of cavalrymen, and the magistrates were determined at the discretion of the Censors. The legal rights to public and private property, and the collection of taxes of the Roman people were also under the approval and discretion of the Censors.

The origin of this office came about because the census, long overdue among the people, could no longer be postponed. However, the consuls, overwhelmed with so many wars from multiple states, didn't have time to conduct it. A proposal was brought before the Senate that such an arduous task, not well-suited to the consular office, needed a separate magistrate. These Censors would oversee the duties of the clerks, have custody of the public records, and, at their discretion, determine the formula for the census.

Although the proposal seemed insignificant, the Senate welcomed it wholeheartedly because it increased the number of patrician magistrates in the Republic, thinking, I believe, as indeed happened, that the wealth of those holding office would add power and dignity to the position itself. The plebeian tribunes, recognizing the necessity of the duty rather than its prestige, did not oppose it. They did not want to appear obstinate by opposing even minor matters.

Since the honor was despised by the leading men of the state, the plebeians elected Lucius Papirius and Lucius Sempronius, whose earlier consulship was shortened as there were doubts the previous year. They were tasked with overseeing the taking of the census, thereby filling out their incomplete consulship by this new office. Based on the nature of their task, they were now called Censors.