**2.51** When the news of the Fabii disaster reached Rome, Gaius Horatius and Titus Menenius were serving as consuls.

Menenius was quickly dispatched to confront the Etruscans, still joyous from their victory. Yet again, a battle ensued in which the Romans performed poorly, and the enemy then took control of the Janiculum Hill.

The City was suffering from the war and food supplies were dwindling. They might have been besieged, since the Etruscans had crossed the Tiber, had it not been for Consul Horatius being recalled from the war with the Volscians. The war was so close to the City that the first battle took place near the Temple of Hope, with uncertain results, and a second one at the Colline Gate. Here, the Romans had a slight advantage, and the victory boosted the soldiers' morale for future battles.

Aulus Verginius and Spurius Servilius were then elected as consuls.

After their defeat in the last battle, the Veientes decided against outright confrontation in the form of war. Instead, they resorted to raiding Roman territory, treating the Janiculum Hill as their own private fortress. Neither the livestock nor the farmers were safe. However, the Romans used a trap against them similar to the one they, themselves, had used against the Fabii. They deliberately chased some cattle out to bait the Veientes, who then tried to capture them and thus fell into an ambush by the Romans. As the Veientes' numbers were greater, the slaughter was greater.

The disaster fueled the bitter rage of the Veientes, ultimately leading to an even bigger disaster. They crossed the Tiber at night and tried to attack Consul Servilius' camp. Driven back by heavy losses, they barely managed to make it back to the Janiculum Hill. Consul Servilius, in response, then followed them, crossing the Tiber, and setting up his camp at the foot of the Janiculum Hill.

The next morning, motivated by the previous day's successes, but more likely the shortage of grain, Servilius made hurried plans that would be his downfall. He recklessly led his battle line uphill, arriving in front of the enemy camp at the top of the Janiculum. He was then driven back more disgracefully than he had routed the enemy the day before. Luckily, they were saved by the timely arrival of his colleague, Consul Verginius. Then, the Etruscans, trapped between the two Roman armies, and forced to expose their backs, first to one and then the other, were completely wiped out. Thus, the Veientes' war, which had rashly been started in anger, was ended by a stroke of good fortune for the Romans.