**2.53** The fighting at home was over, but a new war with Veii had begun in which the Sabines had joined their forces. Consul Valerius Publicola, after calling for reinforcements from the Latins and Hernicians, was sent to Veii with an army. He immediately attacked the Sabine camp, which had been set up in front of the walls of Veii. This caused such a panic that the Sabines scattered in different directions to fend off the attack and the gate through which the Roman standards had entered was captured.

Inside the rampart of the camp, it was more of a massacre than a battle. The pandemonium spread into the city of Veii, with the Veientes rushing to arm themselves in a panic as if Veii had been captured. Some went to support the Sabines, while others attacked the Romans, who had focused all their effort on the Sabine camp. For a short time, the Romans were disoriented and confused as they were attacked on two sides. Then they, too, formed two fronts with their standards turned in both directions, and held their ground. Consul Publicola ordered the cavalry to charge, which defeated the Etruscans and sent them fleeing. In the same hour, two armies and two of the most powerful neighboring states were defeated.

While these events were happening at Veii, the Volscians and Aequians had set up their camp in the territory of Latin allies and were ravaging the land. The Latins, with the help of the Hernicians and without any Roman generals or Roman reinforcements, drove them out of their camp. In addition to recovering their own possessions, they gained a lot of spoils. However, Consul Nautius was sent from Rome to join the Latins and Hernicians to fight the Volscians.

It was, I believe, not acceptable for allies to wage wars with their own forces and under their own command without a Roman general and troops. The Volscians were subjected to all kinds of abuse and humiliation, but they still refused to engage in a field battle.