**2.54** Lucius Furius and Gaius Manlius Vulso were the next to become consuls.

Manlius was given command of the forces against the Veientes. However, there was no war with them. Instead, a forty-year truce was agreed upon at the Veientes' request such that, instead of fighting, they were required to provide grain and pay tribute.

Immediately following peace abroad, there was more unrest at home as the tribunes agitated for an Agrarian Law and goaded the plebeians into a frenzy. The consuls, neither deterred by Menenius' condemnation nor the danger faced by Servilius, fought back strongly. Gnaeus Genucius, a plebeian tribune, seized and impeached the consuls when they left office.

Lucius Aemilius Mamercus for the third time and Opiter Verginius became the new consuls. In some records, instead of Verginius, Vopiscus Julius Iullus is listed as Consul.

Whomever the consuls were, in this year the consuls from the previous year, Lucius Furius and Gaius Manlius, were called to trial before the people. Dressed as if they were in mourning, they appealed not just to the plebeians but also to younger senators with a warning: stay away from honors and the administration of public affairs. That the symbols of power: the consular fasces, the praetexta toga, and the curule chair were nothing more than funeral decorations, they said. Those who were adorned with these noble symbols were like victims crowned with sacrificial ribbons, destined for death.

For those who still wanted to be consul, they said, those people should know that the consul's power was controlled and suppressed by the tribunes, and the consul had to obey the tribunes' orders as if he were a servant. If the consul sided with the patricians or thought there were any other group in the state besides the plebeians, he should remember the exile of Gnaeus Marcus Coriolanus and the humiliation and eventual death of Titus Menenius.

These speeches stirred up the senators. From then on, they held their meetings in private and not in public, away from the scrutiny of others. They agreed that they had to save the accused, whether lawful or not. The most extreme proposals were the most popular and there was no shortage of someone bold enough to carry out even the most reckless plan.

Upon the day of the trial, the plebeians waited in the Forum. They were surprised when the tribune who originally impeached the consuls, Gnaeus Genucius, didn't appear. When the delay became more suspicious, they believed he was being intimidated by the patricians and complained that the people's cause was being abandoned and betrayed. Finally, news came from those who had been to the tribune's doorway that the tribune had been found dead in his home. When this news was spread through the assembly it caused panic and, just as an army breaks up when its commander is killed, everyone scattered in all directions. The other tribunes were scared, as the death of their colleague made them realize that the Sacred Laws offered them little protection.

However, the patricians barely concealed their joy. No one felt guilty about the crime they committed and even those who were innocent wished to appear guilty. They openly declared that the power of the tribunes should be tamed by violence.