
**7.28** Marcus Fabius Dorsuo and Servius Sulpicius Camerinus took over from the previous consuls. Following this, war began with the Auruncians due to a sudden raid.

Fearing that this could be a coordinated plan by the entire Latin nation, Lucius Furius Camillus was appointed as Dictator, just as if the Latins were already armed. He chose Gnaeus Manlius Capitolinus as his Master of the Horse. As was usual in times of these threats, a suspension of public business was declared. Then, a draft was called for and held without any exceptions. The legions were led as quickly as possible toward Auruncian territory.

Among the Auruncians, they found more common thieves than professional soldiers and so they were defeated in the first battle. Nevertheless, Dictator Furius, noting their unprovoked aggression and willingness to fight, thought that the resources of the gods should also be used. In the heat of battle, he vowed to build a Temple to Juno Moneta.

Upon his victorious return to Rome, he fulfilled his vow and resigned his dictatorship. The Senate ordered two duumvirs to be created to oversee the construction of the Temple to Juno Moneta, befitting the grandeur of the Roman people. The chosen location was in the Citadel, on the land where Marcus Manlius Capitolinus' house once stood. Meanwhile, the consuls used the Dictator's army to wage war against the Volscians, capturing Sora through a surprise attack.

The Temple of Juno Moneta was dedicated the following year, during the consulship of Gaius Marcius Rutilus for the third time and Titus Manlius Torquatus for the second time.

A strange event occurred after the dedication, similar to an ancient prodigy at Mount Alban. It rained stones and day seemed to turn into night. After consulting the Sibylline Books, and with the City suffering from religious anxiety, the Senate decided to appoint a dictator to establish public ceremonies of expiation. Publius Valerius Publicola was chosen, with Quintus Fabius Ambustus as his Master of the Horse. It was decided that not only the tribes, but also the neighboring states should perform public sacrifices.  A specific schedule was set for each group.

That year, the people reportedly passed harsh judgments against moneylenders, who were brought to trial by the aediles. An interregnum happened for reasons not recorded. After the interregnum, both consuls were elected from the patricians, Marcus Valerius Corvus for the third time, and Aulus Cornelius Cossus Arvina, suggesting that this was the intended outcome.