
**4.22** Dictator Servilius commanded everyone to gather at dawn outside the Colline Gate. All who were strong enough to bear arms complied. The military standards were swiftly retrieved from the treasury and delivered to the Dictator. As the Romans gathered their army together, the enemy forces retreated to higher ground.

Servilius pursued them aggressively with an army now eager to fight, engaging them not far from Nomentum. The Etruscan legions and their standards were routed, and they fled. He then chased them into the city of Fidenae and surrounded it with a rampart. But, due to its elevated and fortified position, the city couldn't be captured by ladders. A siege was also ineffective as the city had ample grain supplies, not just for normal consumption but a lavish surplus, thanks to their troops bringing it in. With no hope of capturing the city by force or waiting for it to surrender, the Dictator decided to tunnel into their citadel from the opposite side of the city, known because of its proximity to Rome, which was often weakly fortified because its natural defenses made it seem impregnable.

Meanwhile, he divided his army into four parts. Each part would keep the enemy distracted by taking turns attacking the walls continuously day and night. The strategy prevented the enemy from noticing the tunneling work until a passage was finally dug through the mountain and a road was built up to their citadel. The Etruscans, distracted by false attacks from the walls, realized their city was captured when they heard the enemy shouting above them, victoriously.

In that year, Gaius Furius Paculus and Marcus Geganius Macerinus, as Censors, approved a public building in the Campus Martius. There, for the first time, a census of the people was taken.