**4.25** The plebeian tribunes managed to stop the election of consuls by giving endless speeches almost causing an interregnum. After a long struggle, they finally succeeded in getting consular tribunes elected. However, their ultimate goal, to have a plebeian elected, wasn't achieved. All the elected officials were patricians, including Marcus Fabius Vibulanus, Marcus Folius, and Lucius Sergius Fidenas.

That year, an outbreak of disease gave them no time for other matters. A temple was promised to Apollo for the health of the people.

The duumviri did many things, guided by the Linen Books, to calm the anger of the gods and keep the plague away from the people. Despite their efforts, many people and animals died in the City and in the countryside. Fearing a famine because the disease had afflicted the farmers, they sent envoys to the Etruscans, the Pomptine region, Cumae, and finally even to Sicily to acquire grain.

There was no talk of electing consuls. Instead, consular tribunes were appointed, all of whom were patricians, including Lucius Pinarius Mamercus, Lucius Furius Medullinus, and Spurius Postumius Albus.

That year, the plague's severity lessened, and there was no risk of a grain shortage because they had prepared for it ahead of time.

Plans for waging war were discussed in meetings of the Aequians and Volscians, and by the Etruscans at the Temple of Voltumna. The matter was delayed for a year, and a decree was passed that no meeting should be held before that time. The people of Veii complained in vain that the same fate awaited Veii as that which had destroyed Fidenae.

Meanwhile, in Rome, the leaders of the plebeians, long hoping in vain for higher office during peacetime, held meetings in the homes of the plebeian tribunes. They secretly made plans and complained that they were so looked down upon by the plebeians themselves that, although consular tribunes had been elected for so many years, no plebeian had ever had access to that honor.

Their ancestors had shown great foresight in taking care that no patrician could hold a plebeian magistrate's office, otherwise they would be forced to have patricians as plebeian tribunes and they themselves would not be considered as they were now so despised by their own class, much less the patricians.

Some defended the plebeians and blamed the patricians, saying that it was their scheming and political manipulation that kept the plebeians from gaining high office. They argued that if the plebeians were allowed to take a break from the patricians' constant pleading and threats, they would vote for their own plebeians. Thus, having gained the support of their own, they could claim high office.

As a result, they decided that the plebeian tribunes should propose a law to do away with the abuses of political manipulation by preventing any person from whitening their toga, which are ordinarily beige, for the purpose of announcing their candidacy for office. This issue, which may seem minor and hardly worth serious consideration now, caused a lot of conflict between the patricians and plebeians at the time.

The plebeian tribunes succeeded in passing the law, and it was clear that the irritated plebeians would support their own candidates. To counter this, a decree of the Senate was passed to instead hold the election for consuls.