**5.1** Despite peace having been established everywhere else, the Romans and the Veientes remained at war. Their hostility was now so intense that it was clear whomever would be defeated would face total ruin. With so much at stake, each state needed solid leadership. However, the election processes in both states were very different.

The Romans increased the number of consular tribunes to eight, more than ever before. These included Manius Aemilius Mamercinus for the second time, Lucius Valerius Potitus for the third time, Appius Claudius Crassus, Marcus Quinctilius Varus, Lucius Julius Iullus, Marcus Postumius, Marcus Furius Camillus, and Marcus Postumius Albinus.

In contrast, the Veientes, disgusted with the annual political maneuvering that sometimes caused disputes, elected a king. This move upset the other Etruscans, not just because they disliked a monarchy, but because they disliked the king himself. He had previously annoyed the Etruscans with his wealth and arrogance but upset them when he violently interfered with the performance of the annual games, which was seen as sacrilege. The story goes that he was angry over his rejection as a priest, since another had been preferred over him by the vote of the twelve Etruscan tribes. In a rage, he suddenly withdrew the performers, most of whom were his own slaves, right in the middle of the spectacle. Therefore, the Etruscans, more devoted to religious ceremonies than any other nation because they excelled in the knowledge and skill of carrying them out, vowed that they wouldn't aid the Veientes as long as the Veientes were ruled by a king. It was not talked about in Veii for fear of their king, who would have seen anyone mentioning it as a seditious leader, not just a mere spreader of rumors.

The Romans were told that the Etruscans, overall, were quiet because the issue was being discussed in many of their meetings. As a result, the Romans built fortifications to ensure safety on all sides. Some were aimed toward Veii to prevent sorties from that city, while others were positioned toward the Etruscans to block any assistance that might help Veii.