**5.5** "Should we be timid and procrastinate in waging war against such enemies? If our justified anger doesn't sway us, let's look at some facts. The enemy's city is surrounded by massive fortifications, trapping them within their walls. They haven't been able to farm their land, and what was previously farmed has been destroyed in the war. If we pull back our army, who can deny that they'll attack our land not only out of revenge, but also out of the need to steal from others, since they have lost their own farms? By delaying, we wouldn't be avoiding war. We'd be inviting it into our own territory."

"What about the soldiers, whose interests the plebeian tribunes suddenly seem so eager to protect, after trying to take away their pay? How would that sit with them? They have built a rampart and a ditch covering an immense area, both requiring great effort; they have constructed forts, initially a few, but many more as the army grew. They have set up numerous fortifications facing not only toward Veii, but also toward the Etruscans, against any reinforcements that might come from there. And what about the towers, the covered sheds, the battering rams and other siege equipment used in attacking cities? After so much effort has been put in, and they have finally completed the work, do you think all these preparations should be abandoned so that next summer they can start over, sweating over the same work that they already did the previous summer? It would be much easier to maintain the work already done, to keep pushing forward, and to finish our task! The job will be over quickly if we, as one, keep up a steady effort and don't slow ourselves down with interruptions and breaks."

"And not only am I talking about hard work and wasted time. Can we ignore the danger we face by delaying the war? What about the frequent meetings among the Etruscans about sending aid to Veii? As things are now, they're angry, they dislike us, and they refuse to help; they don't care if we capture Veii. Who can guarantee that they'll feel the same in the future if the war is postponed? If you allow any rest, larger and more frequent delegations will go to Veii. The thing that now annoys and upsets the Etruscans, the appointment of a Veiian king, may change after pausing for the winter either by the decision of the people of Veii to remove the king to regain the goodwill of the Etruscans, or by the king's own choice, who may resign his office for the welfare of his countrymen."

"Look at the many negative consequences of this course of action. The loss of works built with so much effort. The looming devastation of our borders. An Etruscan war on behalf of Veii. These are your plans, tribunes, by Hercules, not unlike the actions of someone who, though he could immediately recover from an illness if he submitted to a strict regimen, turns it into a prolonged and perhaps incurable illness by indulgently eating and drinking the wrong things."