**5.7** Appius was already a formidable opponent for the plebeian tribunes in the popular assemblies. However, an unexpected disaster near Veii gave Appius an advantage in the dispute, one which also fostered greater unity among the different orders and increased determination to continue the siege of Veii.

The siege ramp had been pushed forward to the city, and the covered sheds were nearly joined to the walls. But while the work was carried out diligently during the day, it wasn't as well guarded at night. Suddenly, a gate was thrown open, and a large crowd of Veientes, armed mostly with torches, threw fire onto everything. Within an hour, the flames had destroyed the ramp and the vineae, a labor that had taken a long time to build, as well as many men who tried in vain to help and who were killed by sword and fire.

When news of this reached Rome, it caused sadness among everyone. The Senate was filled with worry and fear, concerned that they could no longer resist the sedition in the City or the camp, and that the plebeian tribunes would gloat over the Republic as if they had been conquered by them.

But then, those whose wealth elevated them to equestrian status but hadn't been given horses by the public, held a meeting among themselves. They went to the Senate and, having been given permission to speak, promised to serve in the cavalry and pay for their own horses. The Senate thanked them profusely, and when word of this spread throughout the Forum and the City, the plebeians spontaneously flocked to the Curia. The infantry declared that they, too, were ready to serve the state, without being forced to do so with a draft. They were willing to march to Veii, or anywhere else, and would not return until they had taken the city.

The outpouring of joy from the senators that followed this was overwhelming. Unlike the equites, they did not issue a formal order to the magistrates to thank them, nor were they called into the Curia to receive thanks or stay within the threshold of the Curia. Instead, each senator from his elevated position in the Comitium individually expressed gratitude to the crowd in the assembly through their words and gestures. Rome was blessed and such unity, they said, would make it invincible and eternal. They praised the equites, the plebeians, and even the day itself, stating that the Senate had been overcome by the goodwill and kindness of all.

Both the patricians and the plebeians shed tears of joy together until the senators were recalled back to the Senate-house where they then passed a decree that the military tribunes should call an assembly and thank the infantry and cavalry, and tell them that the Senate would remember their patriotic loyalty. That those who had volunteered for service outside of the normal draft would be paid. A stipend was also assigned to the cavalry. From that time forward, the cavalry began to earn their living by their own horses. This volunteer army not only rebuilt the lost siege engines at Veii, but also constructed new ones. Supplies were sent from the City with greater zeal than before, to ensure that nothing was lacking for such a deserving army.