**2.19** In the following year, Servius Sulpicius and Manius Tullius served as consuls. However, there were no significant events during their term that year.

The next consuls after them were Titus Aebutius and Gaius Vetusius. During their term, Fidenae was under siege, Crustumeria was captured, and Praeneste switched sides from the Latins to the Romans.

A war against the Latins, which had been brewing for several years, could no longer be postponed and it broke out. Aulus Postumius was appointed as Dictator, and Titus Aebutius served as his Master of the Horse. Together, they led a large army of cavalry and infantry to meet the Latin forces at Lake Regillus, located in the Tusculan territory. Upon hearing that the Tarquins were part of the Latin army, the Romans were filled with anger and could not be stopped. They rushed into battle, fighting with more intensity and bitterness than ever before. The generals weren't only giving strategic orders but jumped into the battle and were actively fighting, as well. In fact, almost all the high-ranking officers from both sides were injured, except for Dictator Postumius.

As Postumius was rallying the troops on the front line, Tarquinius Superbus, despite his old age and lack of strength, rushed his horse in a fit of rage against Postumius. Struck from the side, he was quickly rescued by his men and brought to safety.

On the other flank, Aebutius, the Master of the Horse, spurred his horse against Octavius Mamilius, the Tusculan general and Tarquinius' son-in-law. Mamilius noticed Aebutius charging so he, too, rode at Aebutius full speed. So terrific was the shock when their lances collided with each other that Aebutius' arm was pierced straight through and Mamilius was struck in the chest. He was immediately led off by the Latins into their second line, in the rear. Aebutius, unable to hold a weapon with his wounded arm, retired from the fighting.

Mamilius, ignoring his wound, returned to command, urging on the battle. Seeing that his own men were retreating, he called up a cohort of Roman exiles led by Lucius Tarquinius, the former Roman king's son. Their anger at being banished from their homeland and losing their property fueled them to fight more angrily. For a short time, the exiles restored the battle with their determined assault.