**2.20** As the Romans started to retreat, Marcus Valerius, the brother of Publicola, noticed the fiery young Lucius Tarquinius flaunting himself in the first line of the exiles, as if he were inviting an attack. Marcus Valerius, inspired by his brother's glory, felt that the family who expelled the Tarquins should also be credited with their death. He dug the spurs into his horse and charged Tarquinius, raising his spear. The young Tarquinius, enraged, evaded the charge by retreating into the ranks of the exiles and, as Valerius recklessly tried to pursue him, one of these soldiers plunged a spear through him from behind. Valerius' horse continued running at full speed despite the fatal wound until the dying Roman fell to the ground with his weapons and armor falling around him.

Witnessing a brave soldier fall in such a shocking way, the Dictator saw his men were now losing the will to fight as the exiles continued their advance with added strength. In response, he ordered his personal cohort, a special force as his bodyguard, to treat any Roman soldier fleeing the battle as an enemy. The Roman soldiers now had no choice. They stopped fleeing and turned to face the enemy, reforming the battle lines. The Dictator's cohort then joined the battle, attacking the now-tiring exiles with renewed energy and determination, slaughtering many of them.

Another battle broke out between the leading officers on both sides. General Mamilius of the Latins, noticing the exiles being surrounded by Dictator Postumius, rushed to the front line with several detachments from his reserve troops. Titus Herminius, a Roman legate or lieutenant-general, saw him coming with the column, and recognized the Latin general distinguished by his armor and clothing. Leading the cavalry, he attacked Mamilius with such force that he killed him with a single spear thrust through his side. However, while stripping the body of armor and weapons, Titus Herminius, himself, was hit with a spear. He later died back at camp while his wound was being treated.

The Roman Dictator then rushed to the cavalry, ordering them to dismount from their horses and fight on foot, as the infantry was now exhausted, They obeyed, leaping off their horses, and rushed into the front line, placing their shields in front of the standard-bearers. This gave the infantry new courage, seeing the young elite youth sharing the danger of battle with them as equals. The Latins were finally driven back and retreated. The horses were brought forward so the cavalry could remount and chase the enemy, and the infantry followed.

Dictator Postumius, wanting to secure both divine and human help, is said to have promised to build a Temple to Castor. He also promised rewards to the first and second soldiers who would enter the enemy's camp. The Romans were so eager that they took the camp with the same energy they had used to defeat the enemy in the field.

This concluded the Battle at Lake Regillus. The Dictator and Master of the Horse returned to the City in Triumph.