**10.28** Even though the outcome of the battle was still uncertain, with luck not favoring either side, the strategies of the right and left wings weren't the same.

The Romans, led by Fabius, focused more on defense than offense. The battle lasted until late in the day because Fabius knew that both the Samnites and Gauls were most aggressive at the start of the fight. He knew that if his Roman troops could withstand the initial attack, they would have the advantage. It was also known that, in a long battle, the Samnites' morale would decrease and the Gauls, who weren't well-suited for hard work and a heat wave, would become weak. In their first efforts, they were stronger than men, but in their last, they were weaker than women. Therefore, Fabius tried to preserve his men's strength as much as possible until the enemy was more likely to be defeated.

Decius, who was in the prime of his life and full of energy, used all his strength in the first encounter. The infantry fight was too slow, so he brought the cavalry into the fight. Then, he personally joined the strongest group of brave young men, appealing to their leaders to accompany him in charging the enemy, They would have double the glory, he promised them, if the victory started on the left wing and from the cavalry.

As such, he forced the Gauls' cavalry to retreat twice. During the second charge, they advanced further and were engaged in the middle of the ranks of the Gallic infantry when they were thrown into confusion by a new method of fighting. The enemy, standing atop two-wheeled war-chariots and four-wheeled baggage-wagons, fully armed, charged forward with a loud clattering of hooves and roar of rolling wheels. The sound terrified the Roman horses, unaccustomed to such unusual noise.

As a result, the once-victorious cavalry frantically scattered in panic and fear, trampling over their own in their rush to escape. The chaos also caused the standards of the Roman legions to become confused; many in the first line were trampled or crushed to death as horses and chariots swept through their ranks. The Gallic infantry pursued the advantage as soon as they saw the Romans in confusion, not giving them time to recover.

Decius began shouting, asking where they were running  to and what hope they could have in escape. He tried to stop them from retreating, and called back those who were routed. When he couldn't convince them to stay in their positions because they were so frightened, he called out to his father, Publius Decius by name, saying, "Why do I delay the fate that is destined for my family? It's our destiny to serve as sacrifices to avert public danger. I'll now offer the enemy's legions and myself as a sacrifice to Mother Earth and to the spirits of the dead." 

Having said this, he then ordered Marcus Livius, the pontiff whom he had instructed not to leave his side when he went to the battle line, to dictate the words he should say to devote himself and the enemy's legions to the salvation of the army of the Roman people, the Quirites. He then made the same pledge and dressed himself in the same manner as his father Publius Decius had commanded to be used when he devoted himself at the Veseris River in the Latin war.

After the solemn pledge he added that he would bring fear and flight, slaughter and blood, the wrath of the gods of heaven and the underworld, upon the enemy. That he would contaminate the enemy's standards, weapons, and arms with deadly funeral horrors, and that the battlefield would be the place of his own destruction and that of the Gauls and Samnites.

After uttering his curses upon himself and upon the enemy, he spurred his horse forward where the line of Gauls was thickest and met his death by rushing onto the enemy's weapons.