**10.29** Immediately, the battle escalated to an intensity that was almost superhuman. Losing a general typically causes extreme fear. In this case, the Romans halted their retreat, turned,  and reengaged in battle. The Gauls, particularly those who had surrounded the Consul's body, started throwing their javelins aimlessly and without effect, as if they had lost their senses. Some were so stunned that they were paralyzed; unable to fight, unable to flee. 

On the Roman side, Livius, the pontiff to whom Decius had given his lictors and ordered to act as propraetor, announced loudly that the Romans would be given the victory due to the sacrifice of their Consul. The Gauls and Samnites were now the victims of Mother Earth and the gods of the deceased \[Terra and Di Manes\]. Decius was drawing toward himself the army he had consecrated, where everything about the enemy was full of fury and fear.

As the soldiers worked to renew the fight, Lucius Cornelius Scipio and Gaius Marcius arrived with reinforcements from the rear line, sent by order of Consul Quintus Fabius to support his colleague. Here, they learned of Decius' fate. It was a major encouragement to dare anything for the Republic.

And so, since the Gauls stood close-packed with their shields drawn up in front of them, there was little hope of success in close combat. The legates ordered the Roman soldiers to pick up the scattered javelins from the ground, which lay spread out between the two battle lines, and hurl them into Gallic testudo formation. Since most of them lodged into the Gallic shields, and the long, pointed ones even into their bodies, their phalanx formation was toppled in such a way that many fell, unharmed, as if they were stunned. The Fortune of the Roman left wing had shifted.

On the right wing, Fabius had initially delayed the battle, as previously mentioned, using slow engagements. As soon as he noticed that neither the enemy's shout, nor their charges, nor the weapons they threw retained their former strength, he ordered the cavalry commanders to lead the squadrons around to the Samnite flanks, so that, upon receiving the signal, they would charge at the sides with all possible force. At the same time, he commanded his infantry to gradually advance their standards, keeping the enemy engaged.

When he saw that they were unable to resist and that their exhaustion was obvious, he gathered all his reserves, whom he had kept fresh for this occasion, rallied the legions, and gave the cavalry the signal to charge. The Samnites couldn't withstand the charge and fled in a wild dash to their camp, passing by the Gallic line and abandoning them to fight alone. The Gauls stood huddled alone, their tight testudo formation holding firm.

Fabius, having learned of his colleague's death, had a plan. He ordered a wing of the Campanian cavalry, numbering about five hundred, to leave the line and ride around to attack the Gallic line from the rear. Then, he ordered the principes of the third legion to follow the cavalry's attack; wherever they saw the enemy column disturbed by the charge of the cavalry, they would press forward and slaughter the panicking Gauls.

After vowing a temple and the spoils of the enemy to Jupiter the Victorious, Fabius himself proceeded to the Samnite camp. The Samnite forces had been rushing there in disarray, but the gates couldn't receive such large numbers. Thus, the Samnites who were shut out tried to resist at the foot of the rampart. Here, Gellius Egnatius, the Samnite general, fell. Then the Samnites were driven within the rampart. The camp was taken after a short struggle; and at the same time, the Gauls were surrounded from the rear. 

That day, twenty-five thousand of the enemy were killed and eight thousand were taken prisoner. The victory wasn't without cost; seven thousand of Publius Decius' army were killed, and one thousand seven hundred of Fabius's army were also killed.

Fabius, after sending people to search for his colleague's body, had the enemy spoils gathered into a pile and burned them as an offering to Jupiter the Victorious. The Consul's body couldn't be found that day, as it was hidden under a pile of slain Gauls. The next day, it was found and brought to the camp, amid an outpouring of tears from the soldiers. Fabius, setting aside all other concerns, conducted his colleague's funeral rites in the most honorable manner, praising him for his well-deserved merits.