**8.12** After the war ended, rewards and punishments were given out based on each person's actions. Titus Manlius then returned to Rome. It seems that only the elderly went out to greet him, while the younger men despised and cursed him for the rest of his life \[because of his rigid discipline, to the point he would execute his own son\].

The Antians began to invade the lands of Ostia, Ardea, and Solonium. Consul Manlius, due to his poor health, couldn't lead the war. He appointed Praetor Lucius Papirius Crassus as Dictator, who then appointed Lucius Papirius Cursor as Master of the Horse. They didn't achieve anything noteworthy against the Antiates, though he did maintain a standing camp in the Antium territory for several months.

Following a year of a remarkable victory over so many powerful people, the noble death of one of the consuls and the still-remembered cruel command of another, Tiberius Aemilius Mamercinus and Quintus Publilius Philo became consuls. The new consuls didn't have the opportunities for glory that their predecessors had. Instead, they focused more on their own interests and those of their political allies rather than on the welfare of their state.

They routed the Latins, who were rebelling out of anger over the loss of their land, in the Fenectane plains and stripped them of their camp. There, Consul Publilius, under whose leadership and auspices the action had been carried out, accepted the surrender of the Latin people, whose youth had been slaughtered there, while Consul Aemilius then led his army to Pedum. 

The people of Pedum were supported by the states of Tibur, Praeneste, and Velitrae, as well as by auxiliaries from Lanuvium and Antium. Although the Romans won several battles, the main struggle was still at the city of Pedum and the camps of the allied states which adjoined it.

All of these camps were left untouched as Aemilius abruptly left the war unfinished to return to Rome upon hearing that his fellow consul was being given a Triumph. He demanded a Triumph for himself even though his own victory hadn't yet been achieved. The senators, offended by his ambition, refused to grant a Triumph unless Pedum was captured or surrendered.

Aemilius, feeling alienated from the Senate, spent the rest of his consulship acting like a seditious tribune. He constantly criticized the patricians to the plebeians, with his colleague not interfering because he, too, was a plebeian. The limited distribution of land among the plebeians in the Latin and Falernian territories was a major point of contention. When the Senate tried to end the consuls' administration by ordering a dictator to be appointed against the Latins, Aemilius, who was in possession of the fasces, appointed his colleague, Consul Quintus Publilius Philo (a plebeian) as Dictator. Junius Brutus was made Master of the Horse.

Dictator Publilius was popular due to his speeches against the patricians and his passing of three laws that benefited the plebeians and harmed the nobility. The first law mandated that plebeian orders \[plebiscites\], would apply to all Quirites. The second law required the Senate to approve any laws passed in the Comitia before voting began. The third law stated that at least one of the censors should be elected from the plebeians, as it was already permissible for both consuls to be plebeians. The senators felt that more damage was sustained that year by the consuls and Dictator at home than power was gained abroad from their victories and foreign wars.