**8.17** The newly appointed consuls received the army from their predecessors and advanced into enemy territory, destroying the land all the way until they reached the city walls. There, the Sidicinians, who had amassed a large army, seemed ready to fight fiercely for their final hope.

Hearing rumors that the Samnites were also preparing for war, Publius Cornelius Rufinus was appointed Dictator by the consuls, following a decree from the Senate. Marcus Antonius was named Master of the Horse. However, religious doubts arose about the legitimacy of their election, leading them to resign.

A plague then followed, as if the auspices had been affected by the irregularity of the election, and the situation led to an interregnum. After the interregnum, which finally ended with the fifth interrex, Marcus Valerius Corvus, the consuls elected were Aulus Cornelius for the second time, and Gnaeus Domitius.

With peace restored, rumors of incursions by the Gauls caused enough concern to again warrant the appointment of a dictator. Marcus Papirius Crassus was chosen as Dictator, with Publius Valerius Publicola as Master of the Horse. Their active recruitment was stronger than was typical for impending wars. Scouts were sent out and reported that all was quiet among the Gauls. However, there were suspicions that Samnium was planning new attacks, so Roman troops remained in Sidicinian territory.

Meanwhile, King Alexander of Epirus attacked the Lucanians, diverting the attention of the Samnites who came to the aid of the Lucanians.  The two nations fought a fierce battle against the king as he descended Paestum with his standards raised. After winning, Alexander made peace with the Romans. His commitment to this peace, had his other plans been as successful, remains unknown.

That same year, the census was conducted and new citizens were registered. The Maecia and Scaptia tribes were added due to the influx of new citizens. The censors who added them were Quintus Publilius Philo and Spurius Postumius. The Acerrani were granted Roman citizenship, without voting rights, under a law introduced by the praetor, Lucius Papirius.

These were the events of that year, both domestically and abroad.