**8.19** The consuls elected were Lucius Papirius Crassus, for the second time, and Lucius Plautius Venox.

At the start of their term, ambassadors from the Volscians, the Fabraterni, and the Lucani came to Rome asking that they be received under Roman protection. If they were defended from the Samnites, they promised to remain faithfully and obediently under the command of the Roman people. In response, the Senate sent ambassadors to the Samnites, warning them to avoid any aggression towards these states. This diplomatic mission was successful, not because the Samnites wanted peace, but because they weren't ready for war.

That same year, a war erupted with the people of Privernum, who were backed by the people of Fundani. Their leader was a Fundani named Vitruvius Vaccus, a man of high standing not only in his hometown but also in Rome. He owned a home on Palatine Hill, which, after it was demolished and the land was confiscated and cleared, became known as the Vacci Fields. While Vaccus was plundering the regions of Setia, Norba, and Cora, Consul Papirius set out to confront him and positioned the army not far from his camp.

Vitruvius Vaccus didn't have the sense to remain behind his rampart when facing against a stronger enemy, nor did he have the courage to engage in battle very far from his camp. He could barely manage to get his army out of the camp gate, and they were more focused on escaping back to the camp than actually fighting. He entered the battle without strategy or bravery.

As such, Vaccus' defeat was fast and clear. The short distance to his camp allowed his soldiers to retreat easily, sparing them significant losses. Few were killed in the actual battle. A few of the last ones were killed during the chaotic retreat to the camp. As night fell, the panic-stricken army fled to Privernum, seeking protection behind city walls rather than a rampart.

From Privernum, Consul Plautius led his army into the Fundanian territory after pillaging the fields and driving off cattle. The Fundanian senate met him at their border, claiming that they weren't there to plead for Vitruvius Vaccus or his followers, but for the people of Fundani. Vaccus had proven their innocence by retreating to Privernum, and not here, to his homeland. The enemies of Rome were in Privernum and should be sought out and pursued; they were men who who had turned against both the Fundanians and Rome, forgetting their own homelands. The Fundanians were peaceful, loyal to Rome, and grateful for citizenship they had received. They begged the consul not to make war on innocent people. Their lands, their city, and even their own lives and those of their spouses and children were, and would always be, subject to the authority of the Roman people.

Consul Plautius praised the Fundanians and sent letters to Rome reporting their loyalty. He then redirected his troops towards Privernum. According to Claudius, the Consul first punished the leaders of the rebellion. Three hundred and fifty conspirators were sent to Rome in chains.

However, the Senate didn't accept this submission, believing that the people of Fundani were trying to escape punishment by sacrificing the poor and powerless.