**8.21** The situation naturally led to a variety of viewpoints. Each person, based on their individual natures, suggested either harshness or mercy.

The situation was further complicated when one of the Privernian ambassadors became more focused on the condition he was born into, rather than the current crisis. When asked by one senator, who supported a harsher punishment, what punishment he thought the Privernians deserved, the ambassador replied, "It is what those who consider themselves worthy of freedom deserve."

As the Consul noticed that this defiant answer only angered people already against the Privernians even more, he tried to draw out a softer response with a kinder question, "If we forgive the punishment, what kind of peace can we hope to have with you?" 

The ambassador responded, "If the peace you offer us is good, it'll be trustworthy and permanently kept; if it's bad, expect that it will not last long."

At this, some claimed that the Privernian was threatening them, and his words could incite peaceful people to revolt. However, the more rational members of the Senate interpreted his responses more positively, saying that the words they heard were from a man, a free man. Could they really expect any nation, or even any individual, to stay in a painful situation longer than necessary? Peace is only truly upheld when those at peace choose to be so; but we can't expect loyalty if we want to impose slavery. The Consul agreed with this opinion and repeatedly reminded the leading speakers of the ex-consuls \[consulars\], in a voice loud enough for everyone to hear, that only those men who think of nothing but freedom were worthy of being made Romans.

As a result, they won their case in the Senate. Furthermore, under the Senate's direction, a proposal was presented to the people to grant citizenship to the people of Privernum. That same year, a colony of three hundred men was sent to Anxur, each receiving two jugera of land.