**7.19** Two successful wars were carried out this year, leading to the surrender of the Tarquinians and the Tiburtines through military force. The city of Sassula was captured from them, and the rest of the towns would have also been taken if the entire nation hadn't surrendered their weapons and sought the protection of the consuls. The consul was granted a Triumph over the Tiburtines, but the victory was otherwise mild.

The Tarquinians, however, faced harsh treatment. Many were killed in battle, and out of a vast number of prisoners, three hundred fifty-eight of the highest rank were chosen to be sent to Rome. The remaining crowd was killed. The people in Rome showed no mercy to those who had been sent there. They were all beaten with rods and beheaded in the center of the Forum. This was the punishment for the enemy's massacre of Romans in the forum of Tarquinii.

The victories in war led the Samnites to seek friendship with Rome. The Senate responded kindly to their ambassadors and accepted them into an alliance through a treaty.

The Roman plebeians didn't have the same success at home as they did in war. Even though the burden of interest had been lessened by setting the rate at one-twelfth monthly, the poor were crushed by just the principal alone and were forced into slavery. As such, the plebeians paid little attention to the fact that both consuls were patricians or to the management of the elections or other public affairs due to their personal hardships. Both consulships remained with the patricians.

The appointed consuls were Gaius Sulpicius Peticus for the fourth time and Marcus Valerius Publicola for the second time. 

While the City was preoccupied with the Etruscan war, rumors spread that the people of Caere had sided with the Tarquinians out of sympathy due to their kinship. Ambassadors from the Latins redirected their focus to the Volscians, reporting that a drafted and fully armed army was about to attack their borders and then invade Roman territory to cause destruction.

The Senate decided that neither issue should be ignored. They ordered that troops be raised for both purposes and that the consuls should draw lots for the provinces. But the Etruscan war became their chief concern after receiving a letter from Consul Sulpicius, who had been assigned to the province of Tarquinii. The letter revealed that the land around the Roman salt marshes had been devastated, and part of the loot had been taken into the borders of Caere, with the youth of Caere among the looters.

Accordingly, the Senate ordered Consul Valerius, who was fighting the Volscians and had his camp on the borders of Tusculum, to be recalled and to appoint a dictator. He appointed Titus Manlius Imperiosus Torquatus, son of Lucius. After appointing Aulus Cornelius Cossus Arvina as his Master of the Horse, and satisfied with the consular army, Dictator Manlius declared war against Caere by the order of the people and with the approval of the Senate.