**7.20** It was then that people of Caere were struck with the realities of war for the first time, as if the Roman declaration held more weight than those who had incited them through their plundering. They realized that their strength wasn't equal to the Romans and bitterly regretted the raid, cursing the Tarquinians for instigating the entire revolt. No one thought of preparing for war; instead, everyone strongly suggested sending ambassadors to beg forgiveness for their mistake.

When their ambassadors approached the Senate, they were rejected by the Senate and directed to the people. Calling on the gods whose sacred emblems they had received and religiously protected in the Gallic war, they asked them to show the same mercy upon the people of Caere as they had on the Romans when the Roman people were in distress. Then, turning to the Temple of Vesta, they invoked the hospitality and reverence they had shown to the flamens and Vestal Virgins:

"Can anyone believe that people like us, who had deserved so well from the Romans, have suddenly become enemies without reason? Or, if we have acted in a hostile way, that we would have done so intentionally, rather than out of a mistake made in a moment of distress? Would we forget our former good deeds, entrusted to so grateful a people, and then choose to make an enemy of the Roman people? Would we make an enemy of people now in a prosperous state and successful in war, whose friendship we had sought when we were adversaries? It was not a deliberate choice. Rather, it was done through force and necessity."

"The Tarquinians, passing through our territory with a hostile army, had asked for nothing except to pass by. Along the way, they drew in peasants to join them in raiding, which was then blamed on Caere. We are ready to hand these men over, if it pleases the Romans to do so, or we will punish them, if they wish. Let Caere, the sanctuary of the Roman people, the protector of its priests, the keeper of Rome's sacred items, remain untouched and undefiled by the guilt of war. Let it remain as a place of hospitality shown to the Vestal Virgins, and the reverence paid to their gods."

The Roman people were not influenced as much by the current situation, but by the longstanding merit of Caere, so they chose to remember the kindness and forget the harm. Peace was therefore granted to the people of Caere, and it was decided that a truce for one hundred years be granted and it was inscribed in bronze.

The war was then directed against the Faliscans, who were implicated in the same charge, but the enemy was nowhere to be found. Although their territories were ravaged in all directions, the Romans refrained from besieging their towns. The legions were brought back to Rome and the remainder of the year was spent in repairing the City's walls and towers. The Temple of Apollo was also dedicated.