**7.22** This year, the Dictator attempted to obtain the return of two patricians to both consulships, which led the government into an interregnum. The two interreges, Gaius Sulpicius Peticus and Marcus Fabius, succeeded in what the Dictator couldn't, in that they had both consuls elected from the among the patricians. This was only possible because the people were somewhat appeased due to the relief they had received from their debts. The elected individuals were Gaius Sulpicius Peticus, who had stepped down as interrex, and Titus Quinctius Poenus. Some people refer to Quinctius as Caeso, while others call him Gaius. 

Both consuls went to out war, Consul Quinctius to the Faliscans and Consul Sulpicius to the Tarquinians. The enemy didn't confront them directly, so they waged war more against the land than the people, causing destruction and devastation. The obstinacy of both peoples finally weakened to the point where they sought a truce, first from the consuls, then, with their permission, from the Senate. They were granted a truce for forty years. 

With the threat of the two wars removed, it was decided during this period of peace to conduct a census, as the debt repayment had resulted in a change of property ownership. However, when the assembly was called to elect censors, Gaius Marcius Rutilus, the first plebeian to have served as dictator, announced his candidacy and it caused discord among the different orders. His timing seemed inappropriate since, at the time, both consuls were patricians who declared they wouldn't consider him. 

Despite this, Rutilus succeeded in his endeavor through his own determination, and with the help of the plebeian tribunes who were resolved to regain the right to hold offices that they had recently lost in the election of consuls. Not only was Rutilus' reputation equal to that of any honor, but he also gained the support of the people. As he had paved the way for a plebeian dictatorship, the plebeians now wanted to share in the censorship as well. The election results reflected this, and Marcius was elected censor alongside Manlius Naevius.

That year also, Marcus Fabius Ambustus also served as Dictator, not due to any war threat, but to prevent the Licinian Law from being observed in the election of consuls. Quintus Servilius Ahala was appointed as the Master of the Horse to the Dictator. However, the dictatorship wasn't more effective in the consular elections than it had been in the censor elections.