**7.23** Marcus Popilius Laenas was elected consul by the plebeians, while Lucius Cornelius Scipio was chosen by the patricians.

The plebeian consul, Popilius, gained more recognition due to a twist of fate. When news arrived that a large army of Gauls had set up camp in Latin territory, Scipio fell seriously ill. By special arrangement, the responsibility of the Gallic war was given to Consul Popilius.

He quickly raised an army, instructing the younger citizens to gather in arms outside the Capena Gate at the Temple of Mars. He also ordered the quaestors to bring the standards from the treasury there. After forming four legions, he assigned the remaining men to the praetor, Publius Valerius Publicola. He advised the Senate that they should raise another army as a backup for unexpected developments. Once he had made all necessary preparations, he marched toward the enemy.

To gauge their strength before engaging in a pitched battle, he began constructing a rampart on a hill, the closest hill he could seize, near the Gauls' camp. The Gauls, a fierce and fearless people with a natural eagerness for battle, drew up its line of battle upon seeing the Roman standards from afar, ready to engage in battle. However, when they saw that the Romans weren't descending into the plain nor advancing and were not just protected by the high ground but also ramparts, they assumed the Romans were paralyzed with fear. They also assumed the Romans would be vulnerable by being so focused on their work.

The Gauls charged uphill with a savage cry. The triarii, however, didn't stop their work and continued digging the trench. Protecting them in front of the ramparts were two lines of soldiers: a first line of hastati, armed with javelins, and a second line of principes, with sword and shield. They had been standing by, armed and alert, and immediately began the battle.

Aside from Roman courage, the higher ground gave the Romans an advantage and ensured that their javelins didn't fall short, which is usually the case on level ground. Instead, thrown from above, the javelins struck the Gauls with deadly precision.

The Gauls, trying to go uphill, were now weighed down either by the javelins that pierced their bodies or the shields that they carried, now pierced with javelins and making them too heavy to hold. As they neared the steep incline, they hesitated, then stopped. This pause weakened their resolve and boosted the Romans' morale. The Gauls were then driven back, falling over each other and causing a massacre on each other more hideous than the slaughter itself. More Gauls were crushed and killed in the headlong retreat than by the Roman sword.