**4.10** Volscian General Cloelius hadn't been sustaining his army from pre-stocked provisions, but with food plundered daily from the surrounding countryside. Now that he suddenly found himself surrounded by a Roman rampart and without resources, he invited Consul Geganius to a meeting, proposing that if the Romans had come to lift the siege, he would lead the Volscians away.

The Consul responded that the defeated must accept terms, not dictate them. As the Volscians attacked allies of the Roman people by their own free will, they shouldn't leave the area in the same way. He laid out the terms for the Volscian army: lay your weapons down, surrender your general, and acknowledge defeat by obeying further orders. Otherwise, whether they left or stayed, the Consul would be a relentless enemy who would rather bring back to Rome a victory over the Volscians than an untrustworthy peace.

Left with no other option, the Volscians decided to test their slim chance in battle. Fighting in a location unfavorable for combat and even worse for retreat, they were slaughtered from all sides. They eventually surrendered, giving up both their general and their weapons. The Volscians were then sent under the yoke in shame and defeat, each with only a single garment. When they stopped near the city of Tusculum, they were ambushed due to an old grudge with the Tusculans. There, they suffered severe punishment with barely a messenger left to report their defeat.

Consul Geganius restored order in Ardea, beheading the main instigators of the unrest. He then confiscated their property to give to the public treasury of Ardea. As a whole, the Ardeans felt that the injustice they had previously suffered had been fully rectified by the great favor of the Roman people. The Senate, however, felt that more needed to be done to erase the memory of public greed. Consul Geganius returned to the City in Triumph, with Cloelius, the general of the Volscians, led before his chariot, and the spoils taken from the enemy's army he had sent under the yoke displayed before him.

Through effective civil administration, Consul Quinctius matched the glory Consul Geganius had achieved in war. He maintained domestic peace and harmony by dispensing justice fairly to both the highest and lowest citizens. The patricians saw him as a strict consul, and the plebeians saw him as lenient enough. He also managed to get his measures passed against the plebeian tribunes more through his influence than by opposing them. His five consulships were administered with consistent and even conduct, and a life lived worthy of the consular dignity made him almost more revered than the high office itself. For this reason, there was no talk of consular tribunes while these men were consuls.