**4.9** While these events were happening in Rome, ambassadors arrived from Ardea again. They were seeking help for their city, now on the brink of destruction. They reminded Rome of their ancient alliance with them and the treaty which had been recently renewed. Internal conflicts were preventing them from enjoying peace with Rome, they claimed, a peace which they had wisely maintained. The root of these internal conflicts was a power struggle between factions, which have always been and will continue to be a greater threat to states than foreign wars, famine, disease, or any other disasters that people attribute to the wrath of the gods.

Two young men from Ardea were courting a beautiful girl from a plebeian family. One suitor was of the same social status as the girl and was favored by her guardians who were also plebeians. The other suitor was a patrician, who had been attracted to her solely by her beauty. The patricians supported him. Soon, the suitors' dispute infiltrated the girl's family. The mother, hoping for a prestigious marriage for her daughter, favored the patrician. The guardians, however, were loyal to their own class and supported the plebeian suitor. Unable to resolve the issue within the family, they took the matter to court. The judge sided with the mother, but the guardians didn't accept this decision. Openly discussing the wrong decree in the forum among the plebeian men, they then carried off the virgin from her mother's house by force of arms. This act enraged the patricians, who joined the patrician suitor in his fury.

A violent battle ensued in which Ardea's plebeians were defeated and driven away, unlike their Roman plebeian counterparts. Ardea's plebeians left the city, armed, and seized a hill. From there, they destroyed the Ardean patricians' lands with fire and sword. They also began a siege of Ardea, summoning a multitude of workers, many of whom were not experienced in battle, now excited by promises of loot. Ardea, previously peaceful, now showed all the signs of war and ruin as if madness had seized the city fueled by the two young men seeking a fatal marriage even if it meant the destruction of their own city.

Neither side seemed to have enough weapons or military strength. Ardea's patricians asked the Romans to help defend Ardea, while Ardea's plebeians invited the Volscians to help them attack Ardea. The Volscians, led by Cloelius, an Aequian, arrived first and threw up a rampart against Ardea's walls, preparing for a siege. When news of this reached Rome, Consul Marcus Geganius Macerinus immediately led an army to Ardea and set up camp about three miles from the enemy. Although it was still daylight, he ordered his soldiers to rest themselves. At three o'clock in the morning, he raised the standards and moved his troops.

They worked so quickly and efficiently in the dark that, by sunrise, the Volscians found themselves surrounded by the Romans, who had built stronger fortifications around the Volscians than the Volscians had around the city, itself. Moreover, on the other side, the Consul also created a passage to Ardea's city wall, allowing his allies to move in and out of the city.