**1.37** Now with a larger cavalry, they again clashed with the Sabines. In addition to their increased strength, the Romans also used a clever stratagem to win the battle. Tarquin sent men to gather a large quantity of wood found on the bank of the Anio River. He order them to set it on fire and throw it into the river. With the help of the wind, the burning wood crashed into rafts setting them on fire which, in turn, crashed into the temporary escape bridge the Sabines had made. The rafts, now jammed in place by the current, quickly ignited the bridge.

Seeing their only means of escape now on fire not only created immediate panic in the Sabine army, but it also blocked their retreat after their defeat. Many who had just escaped the Romans subsequently drowned in the river's strong current. The Sabines' weapons and bodies floated down the Tiber River to the City, announcing the victory to the Roman public before any news could reach there.

The new Roman cavalry particularly stood out in this battle. As the story goes, they were positioned on both flanks of the Roman army. When the center lines of infantry were being pushed back, they attacked the flank of the Sabines so strongly that they not only stopped them from pushing the Romans back but also made them panic and flee. The retreating Sabines, in chaos, tried to escape to the mountains, but most were driven into the river by the Roman cavalry.

Tarquin, seeing the Sabines in full retreat, decided to strike while they were weak. He first sent the captured spoils and prisoners to Rome, then offered some enemy spoils as a sacrifice to Vulcan, burning them in a great pile. Then he led his army deeper into Sabine territory.

The Sabines were still dealing with the issues of their disastrous loss and, hearing that the Romans were on the way, quickly tried to assemble whatever army was left, lacking any time to do it. Their army was soundly defeated quickly. At this point, the Sabines were desperate and negotiated for peace.