**1.38** The town of Collatia and its surrounding lands were then taken from the Sabines. King Tarquin's nephew Egerius was left there to lead the garrison. Sources have written that this was how the people of Collatia surrendered to Tarquin:

The king questioned, "Are you ambassadors and orators sent by the citizens of Collatia to carry out the surrender of yourselves and the citizens of Collatia?"

"We are."

"And are the citizens of Collatia a free people?"

"We are."

"Do you surrender yourselves, the citizens of Collatia, your city, your lands, your water, your boundaries, your temples, your tools, and all divine and human things into my power and that of the Roman people?"

"We surrender them."

"Then I receive you," said Tarquin.

Now having ended the Sabine conflict, Tarquin returned to Rome in Triumph.

Afterward, he started a war with the ancient Latins. Tarquin didn't engage in a major battle with the Latins, but instead fought different towns one by one. In this way, he was able to conquer the entire Latin nation: Corniculum, Ficula Vetus, Cameria, Crustumerium, Ameriola, Medullia, and Nomentum. All of these were the towns of the ancient Latins or who had defected to them. After this, peace was made.

Tarquin then began public works during this time of peace with greater enthusiasm than he had waged wars, and there was no more rest for the people than there had been in the army. His plan was to surround the City with a stone wall, the beginning of which had been disturbed by the Sabine war and which he had not yet finished fortifying.

He also drained the lower parts of the City, around the Forum, and other valleys between the hills. These areas had trouble draining water because they were flat. He did this by building sewers that were built to slope down and drain into the Tiber River.

Tarquin also started building the foundation for a temple to Jupiter on the Capitoline, which he had promised to do during the wars with the Sabines. Even then, he had a sense of the importance of this place in the future.