**1.39** At that time, a prodigy \[omen\] happened in the palace, both in sight and in effect. Sources have written that, while a servant boy named Servius Tullius was sleeping, his head blazed with an aura of fire which many people saw. The outcry about this miracle woke up the royal family and they went to see what was happening. As a servant tried to extinguish the fire with water, the queen stopped him. She said not to disturb the boy until he woke up naturally. When he did wake up, the fire went out.

Queen Tanaquil, being an expert in omens as has been said, spoke to King Tarquin in a secret room about what they had seen. "Do you see this boy that we're raising in such a humble way? I believe he will be our guiding light in tough times and protect our royal house when we're in trouble. Therefore, we should nourish this boy with great care, as he may be destined to be the source of great honor for both the state and for ourselves personally."

From then on, they treated him like their own son. They trained him in the kinds of things he needed to know to be a great leader. The task was an easy one, as it was carrying out the will of the gods. The young man turned out to be of truly royal character and when it was time for Tarquin's and Tanaquil's daughter to get married, none of the other Roman youths compared to Servius Tullius. So, they arranged for their daughter to marry him.

This honor makes it hard to believe that, as some have written, he was the son of a slave or that he was a slave himself when he was young. I'm inclined to believe that when the city of Corniculum was captured, Servius Tullius's pregnant mother was taken prisoner. Because of her high status as the wife of Corniculum's leader, who had been killed in the battle, Tanaquil spared her from slavery. She gave birth to Servius in this house of Tarquinius Priscus, the king of Rome. This act of kindness strengthened the bond between the two women. The boy was raised in the house from a young age and was loved and respected, but because his mother was captured by the enemy, some people thought he was the son of a slave.