**1.40** In the thirty-eighth year of King Tarquin's reign, Servius Tullius held a place of honor among the royal family and was highly respected by the senators and plebeians, as well.

By this time, the two sons of Ancus, the former king, held years of resentment. They had always felt it was a great insult that they had lost their father's crown due to King Tarquin, once their trusted guardian, who betrayed them by sending them off to hunt when the elections for king were happening. They were also angry that a foreigner, who wasn't even from an Italian family, was ruling Rome.

Their anger boiled over when they realized that, after Tarquin, the crown wouldn't return to them. Instead, it would go to a slave. They couldn't believe that one hundred years after Romulus, a god-like figure, ruled Rome, a slave born of a slave would now take the throne. They felt it would be a disgrace to the Roman name and their family if a slave ruled Rome while there were still male descendants of King Ancus alive, so they decided to stop this from happening through force.

The brothers' anger was directed more toward King Tarquin than Servius. They knew that a king would be able to seek revenge for an attempted assassination with more strength and more resources than a common person would. They also thought that if Servius were killed, Tarquin would simply choose another son-in-law and make him heir to the throne. So, they planned to kill the king, choosing two of the most desperate shepherds to carry out the plan.

As the story goes, the shepherds faked a fight on the entranceway of the palace drawing all the royal attendants to them. Then when both were calling for the king and their cries had reached the king's ears, he called them in. At first, they both shouted at each other in unison. Restrained by the lictor, they were ordered to speak taking turns. While the king was listening to one of them, turning his body to face him, the other hit him in the head with an axe. They left the axe in the wound and both rushed out of the palace.