**1.33** After entrusting the sacred duties he instituted to the flamens and other priests, King Ancus enlisted a new army and he marched to war. He successfully captured Politorium, a city of the Latins. Following the tradition of previous kings who expanded Rome by incorporating defeated enemies as citizens, he moved all the citizens from Politorium to Rome.

The earliest Romans had settled the Palatine Hill. The Sabines occupied the Capitoline Hill with the Citadel, to the west. The Albans lived on the Caelian Hill, to the east, which was the old Romans' home. The Aventine Hill was given to the new arriving citizens. When both Telleni and Ficana were captured, these new citizens were also added to the Aventine Hill.

Later, the town of Politorium, which was left deserted, was repopulated by Ancient Latins and had to be recaptured again, Accordingly, after recapturing it, the Romans then razed the city to the ground so enemies wouldn't use it in the future.

Finally, the remaining Latins were driven into Medullia, where various battles were fought with various victories as the town was well-defended and had a strong garrison. The Latin army had set up camp in the open fields and several times they brought their standards close to the Romans for battles. Ultimately, however, King Ancus, having combined all his forces, led them to a decisive victory. He returned to Rome with significant spoils, and also took many thousands of Latins into the City. They were given a district to live near the Temple of Murcia, which connected the Aventine Hill to the Palatine Hill.

The Janiculum, the second-tallest hill, was also incorporated into Rome, not because of a lack of space, but to prevent it from being taken and used by enemies. It was decided not only to fortify it, but also to connect it to the City by the Pons Sublicius, a wooden bridge over the Tiber River, the first of its kind.

Ancus also built the Fossa Quiritium, a large defensive ditch to protect the lower, more accessible parts of the City.

With the City's population growing rapidly, crime increased. With no clear distinction between right and wrong in such a large population, crimes were committed in secret. To instill fear and to stop the rising audacity, King Ancus built a prison in the middle of the City, looming over the Forum.

Not only did the City grow under King Ancus, but also its territory and borders. He took the Maesian Forest from the Veientes, extended Roman control to the sea, and built the city of Ostia at the mouth of the Tiber River. He also created salt-pits around it and expanded the Temple of Jupiter Feretrius to celebrate his great military victories.