**3.5** During this period, many strategies and attempts were made by both sides. The enemy, having more soldiers, attacked the Roman forces in many areas, dividing them into smaller groups to spread them thin and make them unable to sufficiently fight back. At the same time, the enemy blockaded the Roman camp and sent part of their army to plunder Roman lands and possibly make an attempt on the City itself, if Fortune allowed.

Former consul Lucius Valerius was left to protect the City, while Consul Postumius was sent to ward off raids on the borders. There was no relaxation of vigilance or activity. Vigils were kept in the City. Guards were stationed at the gates and garrisons were posted along the walls. A  suspension of courts and businesses \[justitium\] was called for several days, and a state of emergency was declared.

Meanwhile, Consul Spurius Furius, who had initially endured the siege of his camp quietly, burst out of the rear gate, caught the Aequians off guard, and launched a successful surprise attack. He could have continued chasing them, but he feared the enemy soldiers might attack the camp from the other side.

Consul Furius' brother, Legate Publius Furius, was so eager to fight that he did chase the Aequians. In his eager pursuit, he didn't notice his own allies had retreated behind him and now the enemy was closing in from the rear. It was too late. His retreat path was blocked and he was now trapped. The Consul's brother fought courageously, however, and after several failed attempts to return to camp, he was killed fighting fiercely. Consul Furius, upon hearing his brother was surrounded, turned back to fight, but, rashly rather than cautiously, rushed into the midst of the battle and was also wounded. He was barely rescued by his men. The ordeal demoralized the Roman troops but made the enemy more ferocious.

The enemy was emboldened by both the death of the legate and the consul's injury. Now, it could not be held back by any force. The Romans were beaten back into their camp and were now under siege again, except, this time, they were weak and had lost hope. The situation would have been dire if proconsul Titus Quinctius hadn't arrived with reinforcements from the Latins and Hernicians.

Quinctius arrived to find the Aequian army so focused on the Roman camp that they weren't paying attention to anything else. They hadn't noticed their arrival. He glanced at the decapitated head of the fallen Roman legate arrogantly on display.

Immediately, he gave the signal to attack from the rear. He then gave another signal from far away so that the Romans in the camp knew to pour out of the gates. A large amount of Aequians were now surrounded on all sides by the Romans.

In other parts of Roman territory, the enemy forces weren't so much killed as scattered. As the Aequians were running and looting in different directions, Consul Postumius hit them at various points where he had previously garrisoned troops and gathered up their spoils. The fleeing enemy troops also ran into the victorious Quinctius as he was returning with the injured Consul Spurius Furius. The Roman army then avenged Consul Furius' injury, the death of Legate Publius Furius, and the slaughter of the cohorts by attacking them with great success. Both sides suffered heavy losses.

It's hard to determine the exact number of soldiers who fought or died due to how long ago this happened. However, Valerius Antias estimates that five thousand eight hundred Romans died in the Hernician territory. He also estimates that two thousand four hundred of the Aequian looters were killed by Consul Aulus Postumius on the Roman borders. The rest of the enemy forces who were looting and ran into Quinctius suffered more losses, with four thousand slain, and, citing the number more precisely, he says four thousand two hundred thirty were killed.

After this, the Romans returned to Rome and the justitium, or state of emergency, was lifted. In the following days, there were reports of the sky appearing to be on fire and other strange prodigies, whether really seen or just imagined. To calm these fears, a three-day period of religious observance was declared, and all the temples were filled with people praying for the gods' protection. The Latin and Hernician emergency cohorts, after being thanked by the Senate, were dismissed and sent back home. The thousand soldiers from Antium arrived too late to help in the battle, so they were dismissed almost in disgrace.