**8.33** Dictator Papirius' anger was not calmed by their pleas, but instead, it further provoked him, and the legates were ordered to leave the tribunal. Despite several attempts to quiet the crowd by a herald, the noise was too great. Neither the Dictator nor his officers could be heard. The situation was so chaotic that it was only ended by the arrival of night, much like a battle. The Master of the Horse was told to return the next day. However, he was warned that Papirius, who was already agitated and angry, would likely be even more aggressive.

Fabius secretly left the camp and went to Rome. There, he called a meeting of the Senate, following the advice of his father, Marcus Fabius, a three-time consul and former dictator.

While he was passionately describing to the Senate the Dictator's rage and unjustness, the sound of lictors clearing the way outside the Curia was heard. Papirius had arrived, full of anger, having followed with a swift cavalry as soon as he heard that Fabius had left the camp. The argument started again, and the Dictator ordered Fabius to be arrested. Despite the pleas of the leading patricians and the entire Senate urging restraint, the Dictator would not relent.

His father, Marcus Fabius, then said, "Since neither the authority of the Senate, nor my age, at which you prepare to make me childless,  nor the noble birth and virtue of the Master of the Horse, whom you yourself appointed, nor the prayers that have often calmed the anger of an enemy and appeased the wrath of the gods, carry any weight with you, I call upon the plebeian tribunes for support and appeal to the people. Since you are fleeing the judgment of your own army, and the judgment of the Senate, I call you before a judge, Papirius, who surely has more power and authority than you, even as a Dictator. We shall see whether you'll submit to the right of appeal, to which even Tullus Hostilius, a Roman king, once submitted!"

They went straight from the Curia to the assembly. There, the Dictator was accompanied by few people, while the Master of the Horse was accompanied by all the nobles of the first rank. Papirius ordered the Master of the Horse to step down from the Rostra. Fabius' father, following him, said, "You do well in ordering us to step down. It's here where even private citizens can speak." At first, there were few speeches and only fierce shouting matches. Eventually, the indignation of old Fabius and the strength of his voice overcame the noise, accusing Papirius of arrogance and cruelty.

"I, too, had been a dictator of Rome. Never did I mistreat anyone, not even the lowest plebeian, nor centurion, nor soldier. But Papirius seeks victory and triumph over a Roman general, just as he would over the generals of the enemy! What a huge difference between the restraint of the ancients and this new pride and cruelty!"

"Lucius Quinctius Cincinnatus, as dictator, exercised no further severity on Consul Lucius Minucius even though he rescued Minucius from a siege. He did not rage any further at him but left him at the head of the army, demoting him to the position of legate instead of consul."

"Marcus Furius Camillus, in the case of Lucius Furius Medullinus, who, in contempt of Marcus Furius' great age and authority, ignored his advice and fought a battle with a disastrous result, not only restrained his anger at the time, but also refrained from writing an unfavorable report of his conduct to the people or the Senate. After returning home, when the patricians gave him the power of electing from among his colleagues whomever he might approve as an associate with himself in the command, chose Lucius Furius again in preference to all the other consular tribunes."

"As for the Roman people, in whose hands lay ultimate authority, had only fined those who had lost their army through rashness and ignorance, despite their own anger. Until that day, no commander had ever been condemned to death for mishandling a war."

"But now, even Roman generals when victorious and having earned a most honorable Triumph, are threatened with rods and axes? This is a treatment which wouldn't have been deemed allowable, even towards those who had been defeated by an enemy."

"What would my son have to suffer if he had lost his army? What if he had been routed, then retreated, and then driven out of his camp? How much more extreme could Papirius get with his anger and violence, than to beat him, and put him to death? How was this consistent with reason? Through the victory of Quintus Fabius, Rome should be filled with joy, exulting in victory, and occupied in thanksgivings and congratulations. While at the same time, for his sake, the temples of the gods are being thrown open, their altars smoking with sacrifices, and loaded with honors and offerings. Instead, he should be stripped naked and beaten with rods in the sight of the Roman people, within view of the Capitol Hill and the Citadel in front of those gods whom he had called upon in two different battles, and not in vain? Would this army which had conquered the enemy under his leadership and auspices accept such an outrage? What mourning would there be in the Roman camp! What joy among our enemies!"

The elder Fabius alternated between accusations and complaints, imploring the aid both of gods and men, before bursting into tears and warmly embracing his son.