**8.34** With him on one side stood the majesty of the Senate, the people's support, the plebeian tribunes' support, and the memory of the absent army.

On the other side, Papirius paraded the invincible rule of the Roman people, the discipline of military service, the Dictator's edict, always seen as a divine command, the rule of Manlius and his decision to put public good before his love for his child. Also, he spoke of Lucius Brutus, the founder of Roman freedom, who had done the very same thing with his two sons.

Now, said Papirius, the senators are like easy-going companions and indulgent old men, showing favor to this young man for having scorned another's command, as if it were a small matter, doing a favor for the youth who had overthrown military discipline.

Papirius declared that he would stick to his plan and wouldn't lessen the punishment deserved by the Master of the Horse who ignored his orders while the auspices were uncertain. Whether the majesty of the Roman authority would last forever was not up to him, but Lucius Papirius wouldn't diminish the power of the dictator.

He hoped that the plebeian tribune office, which was inviolable itself, wouldn't interfere with the Roman government's authority by its intervention with a veto. He also hoped that the Roman people wouldn't destroy the sacred rites of the dictatorship.

If this happened, he continued, posterity would not blame Lucius Papirius for this decline, but the tribunes and the corrupt judgment of the people, since once military discipline was polluted, everything would change. The soldier would no longer follow the centurion's orders, the centurion wouldn't follow the tribune's orders, the tribune wouldn't follow the legate's orders, the legate wouldn't follow the consul's orders, and the Master of the Horse wouldn't follow the dictator's orders. No one would respect men or even gods. Neither the generals' edicts nor the auspices would be respected. Soldiers would wander without provisions through friendly and enemy lands without permission and would leave the service whenever they wanted, ignoring their oaths. The military standards would be abandoned and ignored. Soldiers wouldn't gather when ordered and wouldn't care about fighting at night or during the day, on good or bad ground, with or without the general's orders. They wouldn't respect the military standards or ranks. Instead of solemn and sacred warfare, there would only be only blind and random robbery.

"Therefore, plebeian tribunes," Papirius concluded, "you'll be responsible for all these problems for all future generations. You'll be blamed for shamefully defending Quintus Fabius' reckless behavior."