**8.35** The plebeian tribunes, now confused and more worried about their own predicament than the one they were trying to help, were relieved when the Roman people, having turned to prayers and petitions, unanimously pleaded with Dictator Papirius to spare the Master of the Horse. The tribunes, seeing the matter going their way, followed up with prayers, and insisted on begging the Dictator to forgive human mistakes, to consider the young age of the offender, and to acknowledge that Quintus Fabius had suffered enough.

The young man and his father, Marcus Fabius, gave up their fight and fell to their knees, begging the Dictator for mercy. Finally, Dictator Papirius, waiting for silence, then spoke:

"Very well, Quirites. Military discipline has won; the dignity of command has won. Both were at risk of disappearing after today. Quintus Fabius, who disobeyed his commander, isn't acquitted. But he is pardoned, guilty though he is, and he's being given as a gift to the Roman people and to the plebeian tribunes' authority, who offered aid by appeal, not by right."

"Live on, Quintus Fabius. Live on, happy in the goodwill of the City to protect you than the victory you recently celebrated. Live on, after daring to commit a crime that even your father, if he were in Lucius Papirius' place, wouldn't have forgiven. You can reconcile with me whenever you want. To the Roman people, to whom you owe your life, you can do no greater service than to learn from today and obey lawful orders in war and peace."

He then announced that he was no longer holding any grudge against the Master of the Horse. As he left the platform, the Senate and the People, who were even happier, surrounded them, on the one side, praising the Dictator and on the other, congratulating the Master of the Horse. The reconciliation was thought to reaffirm the military authority, not through the punishment of Fabius, but through the danger he had faced, as evidenced by the execution of young Manlius. 

It happened that year that whenever the Dictator left the army, the Samnites would stir to action. But Marcus Valerius, the legate in charge of the camp, used Quintus Fabius as an example, fearing Papirius' unforgiving anger more than the enemy's violence. Accordingly, when grain farmers were ambushed and killed in difficult terrain, it was widely believed that the legate could have helped them if he hadn't been afraid of his strict orders. It caused the soldiers to turn against the Dictator, who they were already angry with for being unforgiving towards Quintus Fabius and for only pardoning him at the request of the Roman people, something he had refused to do at their request.