**8.36** After the Dictator appointed Lucius Papirius Crassus to take charge of the City, he banned Master of the Horse Quintus Fabius from exercising any official duties. After this, he returned to the camp. His arrival didn't bring much joy to his soldiers, nor did it instill fear in the enemy. The next day, the enemy approached his camp ready for battle, unconcerned whether the Dictator was there or not.

However, Lucius Papirius was a man of great skill; if the soldiers had supported his strategies, there is no doubt that the war with the Samnites could have ended that day. He arranged the lines of battle wisely, taking into account the terrain and placement of the reserve soldiers, adding supplies where needed.

But the soldiers didn't fight with full force, intentionally avoiding victory to tarnish Papirius' reputation. Despite this, many Samnites were killed and many Romans were injured. 

The experienced commander quickly realized what stood in the way of victory. He understood that he needed to control his temper and balance strictness with kindness. Thus, gathering his legates, he personally visited the tents of the wounded soldiers, asking about their health and entrusting their care specifically by name to the officers, tribunes, and prefects. He did this so skillfully in a manner which gained him popularity that it won him the soldiers' affection and restored their loyalty to him. Their gratitude for his attention greatly contributed to their recovery.

Once the army was healthy again, they engaged the enemy in battle. With full confidence in their success, they defeated and scattered the Samnites so thoroughly that this was the last time the Samnites faced the Dictator on the battlefield. The victorious army then roamed Samnite territory, unopposed, and collected the spoils of war. The Dictator had declared that all spoils belonged to the soldiers, which further motivated them. Not only public vengeance, but personal profit had sharpened their fury against the enemy.

Crushed by these losses, the Samnites pleaded with Dictator Papirius for peace. They promised to provide each soldier with a new set of clothing and a year's pay. When told to take their request to the Senate, they replied that they would follow the Dictator, trusting in his integrity and honor. Thus, the troops were withdrawn from Samnium.