**8.39** The Roman cavalry, in perfect formation, charged the scattered and burdened enemy, causing widespread slaughter.

The enemy, in their rush to escape, dropped their belongings, which obstructed the path and the feet of the fleeing and terrified horses. Unable to fight or flee, they were cut down. Marcus Fabius, having nearly wiped out the enemy cavalry, led his flanks in a small loop to attack the infantry line from behind.

The sudden noise from this direction frightened the Samnites. Seeing their troops in the front looking back, their standards in disarray, and their line wavering, the Dictator rallied his men. He called on the tribunes and centurions by name to join him in renewing the fight. The standards were brought forward with a new cry and, as they moved forward, they saw the enemy becoming increasingly confused.

Roman cavalry was now visible to those in front, and Dictator Cornelius, turning to the various companies, raised his voice and hands to show that he saw the standards and shields of his own cavalry. On hearing and seeing this, it was as if they had suddenly forgot their fatigue and the wounds they had endured for almost the whole day, feeling like they were no different from those who had just received the signal for battle from the camp. They roused themselves and charged the enemy with renewed energy.

The Samnites couldn't withstand the combined terror of the cavalry and the force of the infantry any longer. Some were trapped and killed in the field, while others scattered and fled. The enemy's infantry who remained were surrounded and killed, while the cavalry slaughtered the fleeing enemy, including the Samnite general.

The battle effectively broke the Samnites. In all their councils they lamented that it wasn't surprising that they achieved no success as it was an impious war started in violation of a treaty. The gods, they believed, were more offended with them than the Romans and they deserved their misfortune. They would have to pay a heavy penalty for this war. The only question is whether the penalty should be the paid by the blood of a guilty few, or the innocent blood of all. Some already dared to name the instigators of the war.

One name, Brutulus Papius, was mentioned by everyone. He was a noble and powerful Samnite, and undoubtedly the one who broke the recent truce. The praetors were forced to report about it and to ask the assembly about him.  A decree was then made stating that Brutulus Papius should be handed over to the Romans and, with him, all the spoils taken from the Romans, plus all Roman prisoners. Whatever restitution was demanded by the fetials, in accordance with the treaty, it was to be restored in accordance with the law and divine order.

Following this decision, fetials were sent to Rome, as decreed, along with the dead body of Brutulus; he had committed suicide to avoid the intended punishment and disgrace. It was decided that his possessions should also be handed over with his body. However, only the Roman prisoners and the spoils recognized by their owners were accepted. The rest of the surrender was deemed invalid.

Dictator Cornelius was granted a Triumph by a decree of the Senate.