**7.3** The initial introduction of plays, designed as a religious atonement, didn't alleviate their religious fear or their physical ailments. Furthermore, when the circus was flooded by the Tiber overflowing its banks and interrupting their performance, it terrified them. It was as if the gods had turned their backs on them and rejected their attempts to appease their anger.

Therefore, in the consulship of Gnaeus Genucius Aventinensis and Lucius Aemilius Mamercinus for the second time, the search for atonements was affecting people's minds more than what their diseases did to their bodies. Some elders recalled that a previous plague had been alleviated by a dictator driving a nail into a temple wall. Motivated by this religious precedent, the Senate ordered a dictator to be appointed for the purpose of driving the nail. Lucius Manlius Capitolinus Imperiosus was appointed as Dictator and he chose Lucius Pinarius Natta as Master of the Horse. 

There is an ancient law, written in ancient letters and words, that the highest officer should drive a nail on September thirteenth. This nail was driven into the right side of the Temple of Jupiter Optimus Maximus, where the Temple of Minerva is located. It's said that the nail represented the number of years that had passed, as written records were rare, and that the law was associated with the Temple of Minerva, as she is the goddess of numbers and counting. 

Cincius, a meticulous writer on such monuments, claims that nails were also seen in Volsinii in the Temple of Nortia, an Etruscan goddess, as indicators for when a year had passed.

Marcus Horatius, the consul who dedicated the Temple of Jupiter Optimus Maximus, acted in accordance with this law the year after the kings were expelled. The solemn act of driving the nail was later transferred from the consuls to the dictators, as their office was superior. When this custom was allowed to be abandoned, it seemed significant enough to warrant the appointment of a dictator. 

For this reason, Lucius Manlius Capitolinus was appointed, but he acted as if he had been chosen to conduct a war, and not just to fulfill a religious obligation. Eager to start a war with the Hernicians, he burdened the youth with a harsh draft. Finally, when all the plebeian tribunes rose against him, he resigned the dictatorship, whether out of force or shame isn't known.