**7.4** Despite this, at the start of the following year – Quintus Servilius Ahala and Lucius Genucius Aventinensis were elected as consuls, both for the second time – Lucius Manlius Capitolinus Imperiosus was indicted by Marcus Pomponius, a plebeian tribune. Manlius was despised for his harshness in the drafts, which extended beyond fining citizens to physically harming them. Those who didn't respond to their names were either beaten with rods or thrown into prison. His cruel disposition was even more detestable, as was his self-given nickname of Imperiosus, which was offensive to a free state. He flaunted his cruelty, which he used on relatives and his own family just as he did on strangers.

Among other accusations, the plebeian tribune charged Manlius with banishing his own son from the City. His son, a young man who had committed no disgrace, was banned from his home, his household gods, the Forum, his friends, and the light of day. He sent him to what was essentially servile work in a prison or labor camp.

There, the young man, son of a dictator and born into a high-ranking family, would learn through daily misery that he was the son of a truly imperious father. And for what crime? Because he wasn't eloquent or quick-witted. This natural shortcoming should have been treated with kindness by his father, if he had even a little humanity, instead of punishing him and, by persecuting him, making it all public. Even animals, if any of their offspring are malformed, don't neglect to care for and nurture them. By Hercules, Lucius Manlius compounded his son's misfortune with severity, further hindering his slow intellect. If there was even the smallest spark of natural talent in him, he snuffed it out by keeping him in a rustic life and in a coarse way of living among the cattle.

