**7.6** In the same year, either by an earthquake or some other powerful force, it's said that the center of the Forum collapsed into a deep hole of an immense height. Despite everyone's best efforts, the pit couldn't be filled by each man simply throwing dirt into it. The gods were consulted, \[as they believed it to be an admonition\], and a question was asked about what it was that constituted the chief strength of the Roman people.  A soothsayer sang that the answer to this question must be sacrificed on that spot if they wished the Roman Republic to last forever.

Then it's said that Marcus Curtius, a young man known for his bravery in battle, chastised the people for their hesitation, arguing that there was nothing more Roman than weapons and courage. After he made his point, he called for silence and looked toward the temples of the immortal gods overlooking the Forum and to the Capitoline Hill. He stretched out his hands toward the heavens, then down to the gaping earth as if to the gods and spirits, then dedicated himself to death.

Fully armored and riding a beautifully adorned horse, Marcus Curtius then plunged into the hole. Gifts and offerings of fruits were thrown into the hole after him by a multitude of men and women. The lake that formed was named Curtian Lake. Some say the lake wasn't actually named after the ancient soldier, Curtius Mettius, a soldier of Titus Tatius in earlier times, but after this particular event.

If there were a way to find the truth, people wouldn't hesitate to use it. However, as time passes, it becomes harder to find concrete evidence, so we must rely on tradition. This newer tale has made the lake even more famous.

After this extraordinary development, the Senate turned its attention to the Hernicians. They sent fetial priests to demand restitution, but their efforts were in vain. The Senate decided, at the earliest possible day, to propose to the people a declaration of war against the Hernicians. The people, in full assembly, agreed. The Hernicians were assigned to Consul Lucius Genucius by lot.

The City was anxious because Genucius was the first plebeian consul to lead a war under his own auspices. The success or failure of this endeavor would determine whether it was a good idea to share the consulship between the patricians and the plebeians. Genucius set off with a great force but, unfortunately, they were ambushed by the enemy. The legions panicked and fled, leaving Genucius to be surrounded and slain by an enemy that was unaware of whom they'd killed.

When this news reached Rome, the patricians weren't as upset about the public disaster as they were angry about the failure of the plebeian consul's leadership. They filled the City with their taunts. Let them elect consuls from the plebeians! Let them move the auspices to where it's sacrilegious to do so! The patricians had their honors taken away by appointing a consul from the plebeian class by a plebiscite, a plebeian law. Did this inauspicious law also work against the immortal gods? The patricians' divine authority and auspices has been tainted by the actions of someone who had neither the right nor the authority. The destruction of the army and its leader was a mere warning that elections should be conducted without violating the Law of Nations.

The Senate and the Forum echoed with these words. Appius Claudius, who had opposed the law before, now, with greater authority, criticized it more vehemently. He was thus appointed Dictator by Consul Servilius with the consent of the patricians. A draft and a cessation of business were proclaimed.