**7.26** While the soldiers on both sides were quietly passing time on guard duty, a Gaul, notable for his size and the look of his weapons, stepped forward. He struck his spear upon his shield and, after gaining silence, he issued a challenge through an interpreter. He challenged any Roman to come forward and fight him in hand-to-hand combat. A young military tribune named Marcus Valerius, who thought himself as worthy as Titus Manlius, asked for the consul's approval and then stepped into the open space fully armed.

The fight was notable as it was thought to have been elevated with the divine intervention of the gods.  As the Roman was about to start the fight, a raven flew down and landed on his helmet, facing the enemy. Valerius was pleased about this, as he interpreted it as a sign from the gods. He prayed that whichever god or goddess sent the bird, that it would help him. Amazingly, the bird not only stayed on his helmet but, during the fight, it would lift itself up in the air and attack the enemy's mouth and eyes with its beak and claws. The enemy became so fearful and confused by the sight of such a prodigy, allowing Valerius to strike him down. The raven, rising from the helmet, then soared away toward the east.

Until then, the frontline soldiers on both sides had been quiet. When Valerius started to strip the dead enemy, the Gauls left their posts and ran forward, and the Romans ran to their victorious champion even faster. A fierce fight broke out around the dead Gaul's body. The fight grew as more soldiers from nearby posts joined in, and then by the legions pouring out on both sides.

Camillus ordered the soldiers, who were happy with the tribune's victory, and happy with the gods present, to go into battle. He pointed to Valerius, who was distinguished by wearing the enemy's armor, and said, "Soldiers, follow his example! Lay the Gallic ranks down, around their fallen champion!" Both gods and men helped in the fight, it seemed.

The Gauls were defeated decisively, as both armies were influenced by the success of the one-on-one fight. The first rank of Gauls fought fiercely, as it was around where the fighting had originally begun. The rest fled before the Romans even threw their javelins. At first, they scattered through the Volscian and Falernian countryside, then they headed for Apulia or the Tuscan sea.

Consul Camillus called an assembly and praised Valerius, giving him ten oxen and a golden crown.

The Senate then ordered Camillus to handle the maritime war, so he joined his camp with the praetor's. Things were dragging on by the laziness or fear of the Greeks, who wouldn't fully commit themselves to the battle and thus caused causing a stalemate. Consequently, Titus Manlius Torquatus was appointed as Dictator with the Senate's approval to oversee the elections. The Dictator appointed Aulus Cornelius Cossus as his Master of the Horse and then held the consular elections. To great acclaim, the people named twenty-three year old Marcus Valerius Corvus \["The Raven"\] – for that was his new surname – as consul, even though he wasn't there. Marcus Popilius Laenas, a plebeian, was chosen consul for the fourth time to work with Corvus. 

Nothing significant happened between Consul Camillus and the Greeks; the Greeks weren't land warriors, and the Romans weren't sea warriors. Eventually, the Greeks were driven away from the shore. Eventually, having run out of water and other supplies, they abandoned Italy entirely. It isn't clear which people or nation the fleet actually belonged to. I believe that they had come from the tyrants of Sicily, as most of Greece was exhausted from civil wars at that time and fearful of the power of the Macedonians.