**7.27** After the armies were disbanded, there was peace both internally and among other nations due to the goodwill between the different orders, and there was leisure time. However, lest things be too joyful, a sudden outbreak of disease forced the Senate to appoint ten men to consult the Sibylline Books. Following the Books' advice, a lectisternium was held.

That same year, a colony was established in Satricum, with colonists arriving from Antium. The city of Satricum had previously been destroyed by the Latins.

A treaty was also signed in Rome with the Carthaginian ambassadors who had come to seek friendship and alliance. 

This peace and leisure continued during the next consulship of Titus Manlius Torquatus and Gaius Plautius Venno. Interest on debt was reduced by half to one twenty-fourth and payment of the principal was due in four equal installments, with the first payment due immediately. Despite some of the plebeians facing hardship, the Senate prioritized public credit over individual difficulties. The situation improved significantly when the war tax and military drafts were suspended for that year.

In the third year after Satricum was rebuilt, Marcus Valerius Corvus was elected consul for the second time with Gaius Poetelius. They received news from Latium that ambassadors from Antium were trying to incite war among the Latin states. Before the enemy could grow stronger, they were ordered to attack the Volscians.

They marched to Satricum with an aggressive army, where the Antians and other Volscians met them. They had already prepared their forces in advance in anticipation of a Roman advance. The battle began immediately, helped along by their long-standing animosity. The Volscians, who were always more eager to start wars than to fight them, were defeated and fled to the walls of Satricum. However, their faith in their walls wasn't strong enough, and when the city was surrounded by ring of troops with ladders, and about to be taken, they surrendered.

Four thousand soldiers, along with many unarmed civilians, were captured. The city was destroyed and set on fire, except for the Temple of Mater Matuta. All the spoils were given to the soldiers. In addition to the spoils, four thousand men who surrendered were taken. During the consul's Triumph these men were paraded in chains in front of his chariot and were later sold into slavery, bringing a large amount of money into the treasury. Some say that these captives were actually slaves, not enemy soldiers, and that this is more likely than the idea that the soldiers who had surrendered were sold.