**4.31** Four consular tribunes were elected: Titus Quinctius Poenus, who had been consul, Gaius Furius Pacilus, Marcus Postumius Albinus, and Aulus Cornelius Cossus. Of these, Cornelius Cossus was left in charge of the City.

The other three left for Veii after completing the draft for the necessary soldiers. These men showed how useless a divided command is in war as each insisted on his own strategy. Their differing views and stubbornness led to confusion, and this gave the enemy an opening. The Roman battle line was thrown into confusion, as one consular tribune called to advance, and another called to retreat. The Veientes seized this opportunity and attacked. The nearby Roman camp took in the soldiers who were disorganized and fleeing.

This defeat was viewed as more of a disgrace than a loss. Rome was rattled, as the state had been unaccustomed to defeat. The people blamed the consular tribunes and demanded a dictator, placing all their hopes of victory on him. Here is where a religious issue arose because a dictator could only be appointed by a consul.

The augurs were consulted, and the rule was removed. Aulus Cornelius Cossus, a consular tribune, nominated Mamercus Aemilius as Dictator for the second time, who, in turn, nominated Aulus Cornelius Cossus, himself, as Master of the Horse. This showed how powerless the Censors were to prevent an unfairly censured family from retaking power once the fortunes of the state demanded actual merit and talent.

Emboldened by their second victory, the Veientes sent ambassadors to the Etruscan states, boasting that they had defeated three Roman generals in one battle. Although they couldn't secure an alliance for their plans, they attracted volunteers from all over with the promise of loot. Only the Fidenates decided to renew hostilities. They joined the Veientes, but as they thought it was impious to start a war with no crime, they killed the new colonists in Fidenae, just as they had killed the ambassadors before.

The leaders of the two enemy states then discussed whether to choose Veii or Fidenae as the war's location. They chose Fidenae as it was more convenient. After crossing the Tiber River, the Veientes thus moved the war to Fidenae.

A great sense of alarm and fear arose in Rome. The Roman army was called back from Veii, demoralized because of their humiliating defeat. A camp was set up before the Colline Gate, and armed men were stationed along the walls. A state of emergency was called, court proceedings and civil business were suspended in the Forum, and the shops were closed. The City looked more like a military camp than a city.