**4.33** The enemy's resistance was shaken at the first encounter, but when the gates of Fidenae suddenly burst open, a new battle broke out unlike anything seen or heard before. A massive crowd appeared, armed with fiery torches that lit so brightly upon them that their size couldn't be doubted. Then, as if possessed by wild fury, they charged full speed toward the Romans.

The sight of this strange battle tactic startled the Romans and they immediately started to retreat. Dictator Aemilius quickly summoned the Master of the Horse with his cavalry and sent for Quinctius to come back from the hills. He rushed to the left wing, which now more resembled a large fire than a battle, as the Roman army retreated in fear of the flames.

He shouted at them, "Are you overcome by smoke, like a swarm of bees? Will you surrender to an unarmed enemy? Will you put out the fires with your swords? If we must fight with fire, not weapons, will you not grab those torches and throw them back? Move! Remember your Roman heritage, the bravery of your ancestors, and your own courage. Turn this fire against your enemy's city and destroy Fidenae with its own flames, which you couldn't tame with your kindness. The blood of your ambassadors and colonists and the devastation of your borders demand this."

At the command of the Dictator, the entire line moved forward. Some of the enemies' thrown torches were now caught in midair; others were forcibly taken. Both armies were now armed with fire.

The Master of the Horse introduced a new fighting style among the cavalry; he ordered his men to remove their horses' bridles. He led the charge, giving his unbridled horse its head and putting spurs to it, the horse carried him into the heart of the fire. The other horses, spurred on, also carried their riders at full speed against the enemy.

While the dust and smoke obscured the vision of both men and horses, the sight that frightened the soldiers did not frighten the horses at all. The cavalry, wherever they broke through, left piles of bodies like a collapsed building.

At this moment a new shout occurred which turned both armies' attention toward it. The Dictator called out that Quinctius and his men had attacked the enemy from behind. With a renewed battle cry, the Dictator and his army charged at the enemy with greater force.

Now two Roman armies, from two separate battle lines, closed in on the Etruscans from the front and rear. The Etruscans found themselves surrounded with no escape route to their camp or the hills, where more Romans awaited them. To add to the chaos, Roman horses, now without bridles, had taken their Roman riders in all directions.

Most of the Veientes fled toward the Tiber River. The surviving Fidenates headed for the city of Fidenae. When the Veientes reached the Tiber River in a disorganized panic, the Romans were waiting for them on the banks, where they were slaughtered. Other Veientes were driven into the water but were swept away by the river's currents. And those who could swim were weighed down by exhaustion, wounds, and fear. Only a few managed to cross successfully.

The rest of the Fidenae army made their way through their own camp and into their city. The Romans, carried along by their own momentum, pursued them, especially Quinctius and those who had just descended from the hills. These soldiers were well-rested and ready for battle, having joined in toward the end of the battle.