**4.34** The Fidenae and Roman armies, mixed together, spilled through the city gates of Fidenae in disorganized chaos. As soon as the Romans had mounted the walls, they signaled to those below that the city was taken by removing the standard of Fidenae from the wall. Dictator Aemilius, already inside the deserted enemy camp, saw the signal. The Roman soldiers, at this point, were anxious to disperse and start taking loot from the camp. The Dictator reminded them that there were more spoils in the city and led them to the city gates.

After entering the city, the Dictator headed to the Fidenae citadel, where he saw a crowd of fleeing fugitives. The bloodshed in the city was no less than that in the battle until, throwing down their weapons, the fugitives surrendered and pleaded that their lives may be spared.

The Romans subsequently looted both the city and the camp. The next day, each cavalryman and centurion took turns drawing lots to choose one captive as their slave, while those who showed exceptional bravery were given two. The remaining captives were sold at auction.

The victorious army, heavy with spoils, was led back to Rome where Dictator Aemilius enjoyed a Triumph. He ordered the Master of the Horse to resign his position, and he himself resigned on the sixteenth day after receiving it, peacefully relinquishing the authority he had received during a time of war and danger.

Some historical records mention a naval battle with the Veientes at Fidenae. This seems as unlikely as it's difficult, given that the river isn't wide enough for such a purpose, even today. According to ancient writers, it was even narrower back then. Possibly, in their desire to prevent the enemy from crossing the river, some boats came in contact, and, as often happens, they exaggerated it into some kind of large naval victory.