**2.3** Everyone believed that war with the Tarquins was inevitable as they tried to regain power from afar, but it started slower than everyone anticipated. What wasn't expected was that the Romans' newly won freedom was almost lost by deceit and betrayal. Among the young Romans, there were several from prominent families who had enjoyed unrestrained freedom during the reign of King Tarquinius and the Tarquin family. These young men, who were of the same age and friends with the young Tarquins, were used to living like royalty. They missed these benefits and, now that everyone had equal rights, they felt oppressed. They argued that a king was a person who could be reasoned with, whether for right or wrong reasons. A king could show favor, kindness, anger, and forgiveness. A king could distinguish between a friend and an enemy. Laws, on the other hand, were inflexible and favored the poor over the rich. They argued that it was dangerous to live in a society where human errors weren't tolerated and everyone had to live by strict rules.

As the young Romans continued to work themselves into a state of unhappiness, ambassadors from the Tarquin family arrived unexpectedly. The ambassadors asked for the return of Tarquin family property, which had been confiscated, but they didn't mention anything about returning to power. The Senate listened to the ambassadors and took several days to consider the request. They feared that refusing the request might lead to a war, while agreeing to it might provide money and resources to the Tarquins so that they could make a war. While this was happening, the ambassadors were quietly working on other things. While their official purpose for being in Rome was asking for the Tarquins' property, they began working on a way to regain the throne. They started to test the waters with the young Romans by privately discussing the idea of the Tarquins returning to power. For those who were sympathetic to the cause, they gave letters from the Tarquins and secretly proposed that the royal family be brought into the City at night, under the cover of darkness.