**2.4** The task of executing this plan was initially given to the Vitellii brothers and the Aquilii brothers. A sister of the Vitellii brothers, married to Consul Brutus, and their sons, Titus and Tiberius, were also drawn into the plot by their uncles, as well. Some young nobles were also involved, but their names have been forgotten over time.

Meanwhile, the Senate had decided to return the property. The ambassadors used this as a convenient excuse to prolong their stay in Rome, requesting extra time to arrange for the transportation of the royal family's belongings out of the City. This request was granted by the consuls.

With little time to spare, the ambassadors then began making formal plans with the conspirators, asking for letters from them to give to the Tarquins. Without these letters, how could the Tarquins believe the ambassadors' reports on such a huge matter? The letters, meant to prove their honesty, ultimately revealed their plot.

The day before the ambassadors left to return to the Tarquins, they had dinner at the house of the Vitellii. The conspirators were discussing their plans privately when a slave named Vindicius overheard them and took notice of what was happening. He waited until the letters were given to the ambassadors, knowing that their discovery would confirm the plot. When he saw that the letters had changed hands, he told the consuls everything. The consuls immediately left their homes to arrest the ambassadors and conspirators, effectively stopping the plot before anything took place. They took special care of the letters, to ensure they weren't lost, and immediately imprisoned the traitors.

There was some hesitation about dealing with the ambassadors. They were seen as enemies, but ambassadors were protected by the Law of Nations.