**2.7** Though the battle ended this way, Tarquinius and the Etruscan armies were so traumatized by the battle that they decided the war should be abandoned for now. They returned home in the darkness of night. There are strange stories associated with this battle. It's said that during the silence of the next night, a loud voice came from the Arsian Forest. People believed it was the voice of the god Silvanus, saying that because one more Etruscan had died in the battle than had died on the Roman side, the Romans had won the war. Indeed, the Romans left the battlefield as winners, and the Etruscans as losers.

As soon as daylight came and no enemy was in sight, the Consul gathered the spoils and returned to Rome in Triumph. There, he held a grand funeral for his colleague as elaborately as he could at that time. The public grief was a great honor to Brutus' death. He was especially mourned by the women for a year, as if he were a parent, because he had been such a fierce avenger of violated virtue.

The surviving Consul, Publius Valerius, had always found favor with the plebeians, but as public opinion is very fickle and can change easily, he now faced suspicion from the people. Rumors spread that he wanted to be king because he hadn't yet chosen a colleague to replace Brutus. He was also building an impregnable citadel in a high and well-defended place on top of Mount Velia to use as his private residence. When these rumors reached Valerius, he was upset and called the people to a meeting.

In front of the people, Valerius stood on the rostrum and lowered the fasces, the symbols of authority. The people were pleased to see this sign of respect, and that he acknowledged their power was greater than his. After the people had quieted down, Valerius praised Brutus' good fortune, saying that he had died a hero, defending the Republic, at the height of his glory, before it turned into jealousy. Valerius said that he, himself, having outlived his glory, was now the target of accusations and suspicion. From being the liberator of the Republic, he was now being compared to the traitors, the Aquilii and Vitellii.

"Would there ever be any virtue so highly regarded by you that it wouldn't turn to suspicion?" he asked the people. "How could I, a fierce opponent of kings, be accused of wanting to be king? If I were to live in the very Citadel on the Capitoline Hill, should I fear that I wouldn't be trusted by my own fellow citizens? Is my reputation with you so easily swayed? Is your faith in me so fragile that where I am matters more than who I am? I promise you that the house of Publius Valerius won't threaten your freedom, Quirites. Velia will be safe for you. I'll move the house down to the base of Mount Velia, on level ground, so that anyone can live above me. Now, anyone you decide loves liberty more than Publius Valerius may live above me!" Immediately, he ordered all materials to be moved to the foot of Mount Velia, and the house was built at the foot of the mount where the Temple of Vica Pota now stands.