**6.11** The following year saw Aulus Manlius Capitolinus chosen as consular tribune for the second time, along with Publius Cornelius, Titus and Lucius Quinctius Capitolinus, Lucius Papirius Cursor for the second time, and Gnaeus Sergius Fidenas for the second time.

This year, a severe war erupted abroad, and an even more serious uprising occurred at home. While war was initiated by the Volscians, it was further complicated by the defection of the Latins and Hernicians. This domestic unrest was caused by an unexpected source, a man of patrician birth and notable reputation, named Marcus Manlius Capitolinus.

Manlius' ambition led him to look down upon other leaders. However, there was one man he envied for both his achievements on the battlefield and while in office: Marcus Furius Camillus. Camillus had such a unique position among the magistrates and carried the affections of the armies. It made Manlius overflow with anger. Having reached such a high position in Roman society, Camillus treated his colleagues, who were created under the same auspices, as mere servants.

If anyone looked at Camillus fairly, Manlius thought, they would see that he was given far too much credit. Rome couldn't have been saved from the enemy's siege by Camillus had Manlius, himself, not saved the Capitoline Hill and the Citadel first. Camillus attacked the Gauls while they were distracted, unarmed, their minds pre-occupied with obtaining the gold bribes for peace from the Romans.  Manlius, on the other hand, drove the Gauls off when they were armed for battle and attempting to seize the Citadel. The glory of Camillus' victory belonged to all the soldiers who fought with him. However, his own victory was so exceptional that no one else could be considered a partner in it.

Driven by these inflated ideas, and being fiery and uncontrollable in nature, Manlius noticed that, among the patricians, he was not treated fairly. For example, he was not as wealthy as they were for the contributions that he had made. Thus, Manlius became a plebeian supporter, the first among the patricians to do so. He aligned himself with the plebeian magistrates and gained popularity by criticizing the patricians and attracting the plebeians to his side. He was now guided by public approval rather than wisdom, and he preferred to be notorious rather than virtuous.

Not satisfied with using the Agrarian Laws, which had always allowed the plebeian tribunes to stir up and enrage the plebeians, Manlius began to try to gain the plebeians' trust with an attack on borrowing money. Debt not only threatened normal people with poverty and disgrace, but it terrified the borrower with the thought of being hauled off to prison in chains. At this point, debt caused by the rebuilding of Rome had become enormous. It created a hardship on everyone, including the wealthy.

Thus, the Volscian war, already severe and made worse by the defection of the Latins and Hernicians, was alleged to be a convenient excuse to give the government more authority. However, in reality, Manlius' revolutionary plans were the most likely reason that the Senate chose to appoint a dictator. They chose Aulus Cornelius Cossus as Dictator, and he chose Titus Quinctius Capitolinus as his Master of the Horse.