**6.15** The Dictator was called back from the army and returned to the City. The next day, a meeting of the Senate was held. After understanding the people's sentiment, Dictator Cossus ordered the Senate to stay with him as he set up his curule chair in the comitium and sent a messenger to Marcus Manlius. Manlius, once summoned by the Dictator's order, informed his supporters that a confrontation was imminent, and arrived at the court with a large procession. The Senate stood on one side, and the plebeians stood on the other, each group closely watching their own leader as if in a battle.

Dictator Cossus, calling for silence, then spoke, "I hope that the Roman patricians and I can agree with the plebeians on all other matters, as I'm sure we will agree on the matter concerning you which I'm about to investigate. I understand that you've given the citizens hope that their debts can be paid off from the Gauls' treasures, which the leading patricians are allegedly hiding. I'm not against this. In fact, Marcus Manlius, I encourage you to relieve the Roman plebeians from their debt burden and expose those who are hoarding the public treasures. If you refuse to do this, either because you want a share of the treasure or because the information is false, I'll have you taken to prison. I'll not allow you to continue to unsettle the masses with false hopes."

Manlius responded that he wasn't mistaken. The Dictator, he said, wasn't appointed to fight against the Volscians, who were enemies whenever it suited the patricians. Nor was the Dictator appointed to fight against the Latins and Hernicians, who were being provoked into hostility by false accusations. Instead, he was appointed to fight against Manlius, himself, and the Roman plebeians. Only now had they dropped their fake wars to come to attack him. Only now was the Dictator's strategy to come out as a great protector of moneylenders from the plebeians. He accused the Dictator of trying to figure out some way to charge him merely for being popular with the people.

"Does my crowd bother you, Aulus Cornelius Cossus, and you, senators? Why don't you win them over with your kindness, then? Help your fellow citizens out of debt. Prevent those who have lost lawsuits and been handed over to their creditors from being taken to prison.  Support the needs of others with your excess wealth. Why am I encouraging you to spend your own money? Pay the remaining debt; subtract the interest paid from the principal; soon my crowd won't be any more noticeable than anyone else's."

"But why am I the only one concerned about my fellow citizens? I've no other answer than if you were to ask me why I alone saved the Capitoline Hill and the Citadel. I helped the people of Rome as a whole then, and I'll help each person individually now." 

"Regarding the Gauls' treasures, the way you are questioning me makes a simple matter difficult. Why are you asking about something you already know? Why are you demanding that what is in your own pockets be shaken out rather than given up, unless there is some deceit involved? The more you insist on investigating your own wrongdoings, the more I fear you'll deceive those who are closely watching you. Therefore, it isn't I who should be forced to reveal your spoils of the Gauls, but you who should be compelled to present it to the public."