**6.17** Publicly, voices could be heard criticizing the crowd, saying that they always put their defenders in incredibly dangerous, high positions just to abandon them at the most critical moments. This was how Spurius Cassius, who had offered the plebeians a share in the lands, and Spurius Maelius, who had prevented famine at his own expense, had been ruined. Similarly, Marcus Manlius, who was trying to rescue a portion of the population drowning in debt and bring them into freedom and light, was betrayed to his enemies; the plebeians were fattening their favorites only to slaughter them later.

Was this the punishment for any ex-consul if he didn't obey a dictator's orders? If he lied before and thus had no reply, well, what slave was ever imprisoned for lying? Didn't they remember the night which was almost the last for the Roman name? The image of the Gauls climbing the Tarpeian Rock, and Marcus Manlius himself, as they had seen him in arms, covered in sweat and blood, after he had practically snatched Jupiter himself from the hands of his enemies? Was their gratitude for saving the state a mere half pound of flour?

Should they allow a person they had almost deified, giving him the surname of Capitolinus to match Jupiter's own name, to suffer at the mercy of an executioner, chained in prison and in darkness? If one person was enough to help everyone, was there no help from everyone for one person?

The crowd didn't leave that area during the night, and they threatened to break open the prison. When they were about to use force, Manlius was released from prison by a decree of the Senate. This didn't end the rebellion; instead, it was given a leader.

Around the same time, the Latins and Hernicians, as well as the colonists of Circeii and Velitrae, tried to clear themselves of the charges in the Volscian war. They also asked for the return of the prisoners so they could punish them according to their own laws. Rome delivered a harsh response; the colonists were treated more severely because, as Roman citizens, they had planned to attack their own country. They not only denied their request to retrieve prisoners, but also the Senate, doing something unprecedented with allies, ordered them to leave the City immediately, out of the sight of the Roman people, warning them that ambassadorial protection, meant for foreigners and not citizens, wouldn't protect them.