**6.18** The rebellion led by Manlius grew violent again.

At the end of the year, an election was held. Consular tribunes were chosen from the patricians. They were Servius Cornelius Maluginensis for the second time, Publius Valerius Potitus for the second time, Marcus Furius Camillus for the fifth time, Servius Sulpicius Rufus for the second time, Gaius Papirius Crassus, and Titus Quinctius Cincinnatus for the second time.

At the start of the year, peace with Rome's neighbors benefited both patricians and plebeians. The plebeians, not being called away by any draft, hoped to end predatory lending while they had such a powerful leader. The patricians, not distracted by any external threat, focused on solving domestic problems and healing the state. Both sides became more determined, prepared for the upcoming struggle.

Manlius called the plebeians to his house and held meetings with their leaders, day and night, to plan a revolution. He was bolder and more resentful than before. The recent disgrace he'd been put through had ignited his anger; his pride was not used to tolerating such disrespect. His courage grew by the fact that the Dictator hadn't dared to act against him as Quinctius Cincinnatus had done to Spurius Maelius \[Book 4\]. The Dictator had tried to escape the unpopularity of Manlius' imprisonment by resigning, but even the Senate couldn't endure it. Buoyed by these thoughts and also angered, Manlius began to stir up the already agitated plebeians.

"How long will you ignore your own strength – strength which nature has allowed even the dumbest of animals to be aware of?" he asked them.

"At least count how many you are and how many enemies you have. As many of you as have been clients of each patron, in that same number will you be against a single enemy. Even if each of you were to fight one enemy, I believe you would fight harder for freedom than they would for tyranny. Show them you're ready for war; you'll have peace. Let them see you ready for violence; they'll back down. You must act together for all or suffer everything individually."

"How long will you look to me for help? I won't fail any of you, but make sure my fortune doesn't fail. I, your defender, was suddenly no one when my enemies thought it was right; and you all saw the man who had saved each of you from chains thrown into chains himself. What can I hope for if my enemies act against me even more? Am I to expect the fate of Cassius and Maelius? I'm glad that you were shocked by it. The gods can prevent these kinds of things, but they won't come down from heaven just for me. They must inspire you to prevent it, just as they inspired me – in both war and peace – to protect you from barbaric enemies and disdainful fellow citizens."

"Is your spirit so weak that help against your enemies always satisfies you, but yet, any struggle against the patricians overwhelms you? This isn't natural to you, but you're used to it. Why do you show such force against foreigners and think it right that you should rule over them, but hesitate to defend your freedom against the Senate? Because you're accustomed to fighting with your enemies for power.  But against the patricians, though you try to gain your liberty, you aren't used to defending it. However, whatever kind of leaders you have, whatever your own behavior has been, up to now you have achieved everything you have demanded, either by force or by your own good luck. It's now time to aim for even higher goals. Just try your own good luck, and try me, who has been, as I hope, already tested to your benefit. You'll more easily set up someone to rule the patricians than you have set up plebeian tribunes to resist their rule."

"Dictatorships and consulships must be brought down to the same level so that the Roman plebeians can lift their heads. Therefore, come forward. Stop legal proceedings about your debt. I declare myself the patron of the plebeians, a title that my care and loyalty give me. If you'll honor me with a more distinguished imperium title or honor, you'll make me even more powerful to achieve what you want."

From that point began the discussion of establishing a monarchy. That said, no clear account is passed down, either with whom or how far his plans went.