**2.55** Right after this win, which set a dangerous precedent, a new draft for soldiers was announced. With the tribunes now intimidated, the consuls were able to carry out their plan without any resistance. The plebeians were now angrier about the tribunes being silent and less angry about the consuls giving orders. They felt their freedom was over and that they were back to the old ways. The power of the tribunes, they said, had died with Tribune Genucius and was now buried with him. A new idea was needed to resist the senators.

They believed that the only solution was for the plebeians to defend themselves, since nobody else was defending them. The consuls had twenty-four lictors and even these were plebeians. These men were the most contemptible and weakest of all. They could be easily defeated, if only the plebeians would stop being afraid and stand up to them.

After stirring each other up about these issues, the consuls sent a lictor to arrest Volero Publilius, a plebeian, who, on the ground that he had been a centurion, now denied their right to make him a common soldier. He appealed to the tribunes, but none came to his aid. The consuls then ordered Volero to be stripped, and the rods prepared for punishment. "I appeal to the people," Volero said, "since the plebeian tribunes would rather see a Roman citizen whipped before their eyes than themselves be murdered by you in their beds." The more emphatically he shouted, the more violently the lictor tried to tear at his clothes and strip him.

Then Volero, a man of exceptional strength, pushed the lictor off with the help of the crowd. Amidst the indignant yelling of his supporters at his treatment, he retreated into the thickest part of the crowd, crying out, "I appeal to the plebeians for your support! Stand by me, fellow citizens! Stand by me, fellow soldiers! There is no need to wait for the tribunes, who themselves need your help!"

The men, excited, prepared themselves as if for battle, and it was clear that a critical confrontation would be imminent and nothing, public or private, would be held sacred. The consuls tried to face the situation but quickly found that there was little safety for authority without strength. Their lictors were then mobbed, the fasces were broken, and the consuls were driven from the Forum into the Curia, uncertain how far Volero would push his victory.

Once the disturbance had calmed down, the consuls called a meeting of the Senate and complained about the outrage they suffered, the violence of the plebeians, and Volero's audacity and insolence. Although some gave violent speeches, the older members advised against reacting to the rashness of the plebeians with anger.