**4.7** In the three hundred and tenth year after Rome was founded, consular tribunes took office for the first time instead of consuls. These were Aulus Sempronius Atratinus, Lucius Atilius, and Titus Cloelius Siculus. Their term in office was peaceful, both domestically and abroad.

Some sources have written that the three consular tribunes weren't elected this way. Instead, they claim that it was because a new war with Veii was added to the ongoing conflicts with the Aequians, Volscians, and the revolt of Ardea. Since the two consuls couldn't manage so many wars simultaneously, the three consular tribunes were elected without mentioning any law concerning allowing the plebeians to be elected consuls.

The three consular tribunes held the same authority and symbols of consuls; however, the right of this authority started on unstable footing. Three months into their term, they resigned their positions following a decree from the augurs, who claimed they were improperly elected. Gaius Curtius, who presided over the elections, had not properly set up the ceremonial auspices tent \[tabernaculum\].

Ambassadors from Ardea came to Rome to protest the injustice done to them. But it was stated in such a way that if their land were given back to them, the Ardeans would maintain their friendship and treaty obligations. The Senate responded by saying that the judgment of the Roman people couldn't be overturned by the Senate not only because it would be done without precedent or law, but it also would endanger the harmony among the classes. Instead, the Senate suggested, if the Ardeans were patient and allowed the Senate to decide on a remedy for the injustice, they would be glad they had restrained their anger. They assured the Ardeans that the senators were committed to preventing any injustices against them and it should be taken care of soon. The ambassadors were then politely dismissed, promising to discuss the matter further with their colleagues.

Since the Republic was without a curule magistrate, the highest authority, the patricians gathered and elected an interrex to oversee the selection of a new authority. There was a debate over whether consuls or consular tribunes should be elected, which resulted in several days of interregnum where normal government was suspended. The interrex and Senate wanted consuls to be elected, while the plebeian tribunes and the plebeians themselves wanted consular tribunes. The patricians won out, as the plebeians, knowing that either position would likely be filled by patricians, decided not to fight a pointless battle. Additionally, the leaders of the plebeians preferred not to be considered for an election where their candidates might be considered "unworthy" and be rejected. The plebeian tribunes thus conceded the fight without an election, as a gesture of respect to the patrician leaders.

The interrex, Titus Quinctius Barbatus, chose Lucius Papirius Mugillanus and Lucius Sempronius Atratinus as consuls for the rest of the year. During their consulship, the treaty with Ardea was renewed. This is evidence that they were consuls that year, even though their names aren't found in the ancient annals or in the books of the magistrates. This is likely because consular tribunes were in office at the start of the year and the names of the newly appointed consuls were omitted, as if the original consular tribunes had served the entire year. Licinius Macer, the presenter of the names of these consuls, claims that their names were found in both the Ardea treaty and in the Linen Books, kept in the Temple of Juno Moneta. Despite the many threats from neighboring states, there was peace both at home and abroad throughout the remainder of the year.