**2.50** The Veiian state once again found itself in conflict with the Fabii family, despite having no additional military resources. This wasn't only a series of minor skirmishes or surprise attacks, but full-scale battles fought in open fields with standards raised. Remarkably, this single Roman family often emerged victorious over the one of the wealthiest Etruscan cities, which was one of the most powerful of its time.

Initially, the idea of a single family defeating their army seemed bitter and unworthy to the Veientes. However, they eventually devised a plan to ambush their bold adversaries, taking advantage of the Fabii's growing overconfidence due to their repeated successes. The Veientes began to deliberately leave cattle in the fields seemingly unguarded, and the country people, fleeing, would leave their homes and fields unguarded in a fake retreat. Then, armed Veientes, sent to ward off the raids, feigned fear and ran away. This enticed the Fabii deeper into their territory and further lured them into a false sense of security.

The Fabii's contempt for their enemy grew to the point where they eventually believed they could not be defeated, regardless of the circumstances. It was this overconfidence that led them into the Veientes' trap. They spotted some cattle in the distance from Cremera and rushed towards them, as it seemed there were few enemy forces visible. As they recklessly ran toward the cattle, passing the places of ambush, and were wandering everywhere as happens when in a disorganized panic, the Veiian soldiers stood up, surrounding the Fabii on all sides.

Initially, the Fabii were terrified by the sudden shouting. Then, missiles began to rain down from all sides. The Etruscans encircled the Fabii with a continuous line of armed men, advancing towards them. The Fabii were forced to contract their ranks forming into a defensive, tight circle. However, this only highlighted their small numbers as compared to the Etruscans, with their ranks so densely packed together.

Abandoning the circle strategy, the Fabii then focused all their efforts on breaking through the line by using their bodies and weapons in a wedge formation. They eventually forced their way through the line of Etruscans to a nearby gently rising hill. Once they reached the higher ground, they made at stand; soon the higher ground gave them space to catch their breath and regain their composure. They managed to hold off the advancing Veientes, and it seemed they might even win, thanks to their advantageous position. However, a Veiian detachment who had been sent around the ridge behind them emerged on the top of the hill, thus giving the enemy the advantage once again.

In the end, all the Fabii were killed, and their outpost was captured. It is universally agreed that all three hundred and six Fabii were killed in the battle. Only one male, Quintus Fabius, a boy barely of age, was left behind to continue the Fabian line. He would later prove to be a crucial asset to the Roman people in times of both domestic and military crisis.