**5.19** By now the Games and Latin Festival had been newly restored, water from the Alban Lake had been released onto the fields and fate, it would seem, was now closing in upon Veii.

Therefore, the man destined to destroy Veii and save the Republic was next appointed Dictator: Marcus Furius Camillus. He chose Publius Cornelius Scipio as his Master of the Horse. The change in leadership brought about a change in the minds of the people. Their hopes and spirits suddenly seemed different. The City's fortunes seemed to change as well.

First of all, in accordance with military custom, Camillus punished those who had fled from Veii in that moment of panic and ensured that the enemy was no longer the greatest fear of the soldiers. Then, after announcing a draft for a specific day, he visited the Veii camp to boost the morale of the Roman soldiers. From there, he returned to Rome, without disturbing the camp, to recruit the new army. No one refused to serve. Even the young men from allied states, the Latins and Hernicians, also came, offering help for the war. After the Dictator thanked them in the Senate, and with everything now sufficiently prepared for the war, he vowed that he would celebrate the Great Games, by decree of the Senate, once Veii was captured, and repair and re-dedicate the Temple of Mater Matuta, a temple that had previously been consecrated by King Servius Tullius. He left the City with his army, the Roman people having high expectations rather than just high hopes.

His first battle was an encounter with the Faliscans and Capenates in the Nepesine Field. Everything there was handled with great prudence and strategy and as often happens, fortune followed. He not only routed the enemy in battle but also took their camp and an immense amount of loot. The majority of this was handed over to the quaestor, with only a small amount given to the soldiers.

The army then marched to Veii, where additional fortifications were built close to each other. After many random skirmishes occurred between the wall and the rampart, a proclamation was issued that no one should fight without orders and Camillus put them to work, instead. The most significant and laborious task was a tunnel they began to dig that would reach into the enemy's citadel. To ensure the work wasn't interrupted and that the same individuals weren't exhausted from continuous underground labor, he divided the workers into six groups, working around the clock in six-hour shifts. They didn't stop, day or night, until a passage was made into the citadel.