**2.34** Titus Geganius and Publius Minucius were elected as the next consuls.

In this year, undisturbed by war and civic dissent, the City was attacked by another much more serious evil: famine. First, there was a shortage of food, caused by fields remaining uncultivated during the secession. Then, there was a widespread, prolonged starvation such as what typically happens during a siege. It would have led to the deaths of the slaves in any case, and probably the plebeians would have died, had the consuls not provided for the emergency by sending agents in various directions to buy grain.

The agents went not just to the Etruscans on the coast to the right of Ostia and through the Volscians along the coast on the left as far as Cumae, but also as far away as Sicily. The state's strained relations with its nearby neighbors forced it to seek help from distant lands, but they had problems with this strategy. When grain was bought at Cumae, the Roman ships were seized by Aristodemus, the local tyrant who was an heir to the Tarquins. When the Roman agents appealed to the Volscians and Pomptini people for grain, they not only refused, but the lives of the people sent to buy grain were in danger because of a hostile local population. In the end, it was negotiated that grain from the Etruscans would come to Rome via the Tiber. This helped sustain the people.

During this food shortage, the City could have been further troubled by war from the Volscians if a plague hadn't struck the Volscians just as they were preparing for war. The disease scared the Volscians and even after it subsided, they were so ravaged by it that they were still fearful. The Romans took advantage of this and strengthened their colonies, sending more settlers to Velitrae and founding a new colony at Norba, high in the mountains, to act as a citadel above the Pomptine district.

In the consulship of Marcus Minucius and Aulus Sempronius, a large amount of grain was imported from Sicily and the Senate debated on the price it should be sold to the plebeians.

Many patricians thought that the time had come for the plebeians to be suppressed and to recover the rights which had been taken from the Senate by secession and force. Chief among them was Marcius Coriolanus, who was against the power of the plebeian tribunes, and he addressed his fellow senators:

"If they want their grain at the old price, let them restore the old rights of the senators! Why do I see plebeian magistrates? Why do I see Sicinius in power after I was forced to submit under the yoke, then ransomed, as it were, from thieves. Am I to endure these indignities a moment longer than I can help? Am I, who could not put up with Tarquinius as king, to now put up with Sicinius? Let them secede now! Let him call out his plebeians! The way lies open to the Sacred Mount and to other hills. Let them seize the grain from our fields as they did three years ago! Let them enjoy the scarcity which, in their madness, they have caused! I'll venture to say that after they have been tamed by hunger, they would rather work as laborers in the fields, themselves, rather than prevent the fields from being cultivated by another armed secession."

It isn't easy to say whether this should have been done, but it seems possible to me that the senators could have lowered the price of grain in exchange for formally ending the power of the plebeian tribunes and all the restrictions imposed on the Senate against their will.