**2.35** The Senate found the proposal too severe, and it nearly provoked the plebeians to take up arms in their frustration.

The plebeians felt as though they were being attacked with starvation, as if they were enemies. They believed they were being cheated out of food and sustenance and saw the foreign grain, an unexpected source of sustenance, being snatched from their mouths. They also felt this would continue unless the plebeian tribunes handed over Gnaeus Marcius Coriolanus in chains, and satisfaction was made for the lashes on the backs of the Roman plebeians. They saw him as the new executioner, one who ordered them to either die or become slaves.

When Coriolanus left the Senate, he would have been attacked if the plebeian tribunes hadn't quickly set a date for his trial. This action calmed their anger, as everyone saw themselves as a judge and the master of the life and death of his enemy. At first Coriolanus listened to the threats of the plebeian tribunes with contempt, reminding them that their role was to provide aid, not punishment, and that they were representatives of the plebeians, not the patricians.

However, the plebeians were so angry that the senators felt they had to protect themselves and sacrifice one of their own to appease them. Despite the plebeians' fury, the patricians withstood the anger and used their individual and collective powers by trying to disrupt the proceedings, placing their clients in various places to discourage individuals from attending the meetings and councils. But they were then ordered to proceed.

Then all the senators came forward in a body, as if they were all guilty, prayerfully pleading with the plebeians to grant them one citizen, one senator. If they wouldn't acquit an innocent man, they asked, could they then pardon this senator as a gift, whom they might think guilty? However, when Coriolanus didn't attend the trial, the plebeians' anger prevailed and wouldn't let the matter go.

Coriolanus was found guilty in his absence and went into exile to the Volscians, uttering threats against his homeland and considering Rome to be an enemy. The Volscians welcomed him and treated him increasingly well as his resentment towards his countrymen became more apparent to them and his complaints and threats became more frequent.

He stayed with Attius Tullius, the leading man of the Volscian people and a long-time enemy of the Romans. Both Coriolanus and Attius Tullius, one driven by old animosity and the other by recent resentment, planned a war against Rome. They didn't immediately believe that their people could be persuaded to take up arms, given their many unsuccessful attempts in the past. With the loss of so many young men in the frequent wars and also in a recent plague, the morale of the Volscians was low. The two men decided they needed to use deception to reignite the Volscian animosity, now dulled with time, to provoke them with a new cause for anger.