**9.1** This year is marked by two things: the notorious defeat of the Romans at Caudine Forks by the Samnites, and the peace that followed under the new consuls, Titus Veturius Calvinus and Spurius Postumius.

The Samnites' commander was Gaius Pontius, a skilled warrior, capable leader, and son of Herennius Pontius, who was known for his wisdom. When the Samnite ambassadors who had been sent to make restitution returned without securing peace, Pontius responded:

"Don't assume that our delegation achieved nothing. Any anger the gods felt toward us for breaking the treaty has been appeased. I know well enough that those who disliked that we were forced to return what had been demanded from us by the treaty also weren't pleased with the Romans' arrogant rejection of our atonement. What more could we have done to appease the gods and soften men's anger? We returned the spoils of war, which seemed to be ours by right of war. Then we delivered the war's instigators, dead since we couldn't deliver them alive. We brought their property to Rome to avoid anything associated with their guilt remaining in our possession."

"What more, Romans, do I owe to you, or to your treaty or to the gods who were called as witnesses to the treaty? What judge should I provide to decide how far your anger and my punishment is to go? I am willing to accept anything, whether it be a nation or a private individual. If the weak have no recourse against the strong in human law, I'll appeal to the gods, the avengers of intolerable tyranny. I will ask them to punish those who aren't satisfied with the return of their own property including the property of others; whose savagery can't be satisfied by the death of the guilty, nor by the surrender of their lifeless bodies, nor by their goods accompanying the surrender. These people can only be appeased if we give them our blood to drink and our bowels to be torn."

"Samnites, war is just and right when it is forced upon us, and arms are blessed by heaven when there is no hope except in arms. As in all human endeavors, it's crucial whether the gods favor or oppose what men undertake. Be assured that you fought the previous wars more against the gods than against men; in this impending war, you'll act under the direct guidance of the gods themselves."