**9.10** The senators were deeply moved by these arguments and the person who presented them. A similar sentiment was shared by everyone, including the plebeian tribunes who had said that they would follow the Senate's lead. 

The consuls immediately resigned their positions and, along with the others involved, were handed over to the fetials to be taken to Caudium.

The passing of this Senate decree seemed to bring a new sense of hope to the state. Postumius was on everyone's lips, with people praising him highly and comparing his actions to the devotion of Consul Publius Decius and to other illustrious deeds. It was thanks to his wisdom and efforts, they said, that the state could recover from a shameful peace. He was now offering himself up to the enemy's wrath and torture, making atonement for the Roman people. Everyone's focus shifted toward arms and preparing for war, with the common focus being when they would be allowed to face the Samnites with weapons in their hands.

The state was ablaze with anger and hatred. New recruits were mostly volunteers. Entirely new legions, made up of former soldiers, were quickly assembled and an army was led to Caudium.

Before them went the fetials, who arrived at the gate with the guarantors of the peace. They ordered them to be stripped of their clothes and have their hands tied behind their backs. As the attendant was loosely tying Postumius out of respect for his rank, Postumius said, "No. Tighten the strap so that the surrender is properly executed." 

When they arrived at the Samnite assembly and were brought before the tribunal of Pontius,  Aulus Cornelius Arvina, the fetial, spoke these words, "Whereas these men, without permission from the Roman people, pledged that a treaty would be made, and have thus committed a great offense; for this reason, I surrender these men to you to absolve the Roman people from a heinous guilt."

After the fetial said this, Postumius hit him on the thigh with his knee as hard as he could and loudly declared that he was now a citizen of Samnium. The other man was a Roman fetial who had been injured by him in clear violation of the law of nations, Therefore, the Romans would be justified in making war with them.