**9.12** The Samnites realized that instead of the peace they had hoped for with pride, the war had reignited with great intensity. They felt a sense of foreboding about the consequences that were to come, and it was as if they could already see them. They regretted not following the plans of old Herennius Pontius, as they had lost the chance to either befriend or defeat their enemies. Instead, they fell in between, exchanging the possession of victory for an uncertain peace. Having lost the opportunity, they now had to fight with those they could have either eliminated or allied with forever.

The mindset of the people had changed since the Caudine peace, even before any battle had shown who had the upper hand. Postumius had gained more respect among the Romans by surrendering himself than Pontius had among the Samnites with his bloodless victory. The Romans saw their freedom to wage war as a certain victory; the Samnites felt that the Romans had both renewed the war and won it at the same time.

Amid these developments, the people of Satricum switched sides to the Samnites and, together, launched a surprise attack on the colony of Fregellae at night. Until daylight, mutual fear kept both sides quiet. When dawn came, the battle began. The Fregellans managed to hold their ground for a while, fighting for their religion and their freedom, and even those who weren't soldiers helped from the rooftops.

Eventually, treachery gave the attackers the upper hand. They allowed a herald's voice to be heard, saying that anyone who dropped their weapons could leave safely. This hope broke their urge to resist, and they stopped fighting and began to throw their weapons down everywhere, Others who were more determined escaped through a different gate, fully armed. Their boldness was safer than the credulity of the others. For those who threw down their weapons and surrendered were surrounded by the Samnites and, despite their pleas to the gods and to the promises of their captors, were burned alive.

The consuls divided the provinces between them. Papirius went into Apulia toward Luceria, where the Roman cavalry who had been given as hostages at Caudium were being guarded. Publilius stayed in Samnium to face the Caudine legions. The troop movements confused the Samnites. They couldn't decide whether to go to Luceria, for fear of being attacked from behind, or to stay where they were, in case Luceria was lost in the meantime. They decided it was best to entrust their cause to Fortune and face Consul Publilius in battle once and for all, so they prepared their forces.