**9.13** As Publilius was preparing for battle, he thought it necessary to speak to his soldiers first and called for an assembly. Even though the soldiers quickly gathered at the general's quarters, their loud demands for battle drowned out whatever the general's words were. Still, each soldier's thoughts about their recent disgrace were there to exhort the Consul.

So marched into the battle, encouraging the standard-bearers to move faster. To avoid any delay in the rush by throwing their javelins and drawing their swords, they threw their javelins as if a signal had been given for that purpose and charged at the enemy at full speed with their swords drawn. There was no display of a general's skill in arranging ranks or reserves. The soldiers' anger did everything with a fury that was almost like madness.

Not only was the enemy completely routed, but they didn't even dare to slow their escape by retreating to their camp. Instead, they scattered and fled toward Apulia. Later, they gathered their forces into one column and reached Luceria. The same anger that had driven the Romans through the enemy's line also drove them into the enemy's camp. There was more killing and bloodshed there than in the field, and most of the loot was destroyed in their rage.

The other army, with Consul Papirius, had reached Arpi on the coast. They passed through all the territories without any trouble. The locals had suffered from the injuries and hatred by from the Samnites; it was not from any favor by the Romans. At that time the Samnites lived scattered in the mountains in separate villages, and they despised the plains and coastal areas with their gentler farmers and, as often happens, ravaged those regions in a manner similar to their own rugged and wild nature. If this region had been friendly toward the Samnites, they could have stopped the Roman army from reaching Arpi, or they could have cut off the supply lines and caused a severe shortage of necessities.

Even so, when they moved from there to Luceria, both the Romans and the Samnites suffered from lack of supplies. The Romans received supplies from Arpi, but in such small amounts that the cavalry had to carry grain from there to the camp in small bags for the infantry who were on guard duty and working. Sometimes they encountered the enemy and had to throw the bags of grain off their horses in order to fight. 

Before the other consul and his victorious army arrived, the Samnites in Luceria had received supplies and reinforcements from the Samnite-held mountains. But the arrival of Publilius limited their resources. He left the siege operations to his colleague and focused on disrupting the enemy's supply lines by roaming the countryside and making the entire area hostile to the Samnites.

With little hope in their ability to withstand the shortage any longer, the Samnites, who were camped at Luceria, had to gather their forces from all sides and engage in battle with Papirius.