**9.14** At this point, when both sides were getting ready for a fight, ambassadors from Tarentum stepped in, demanding that both the Samnites and Romans stop their war.

Whomever refused to lay down their arms, they said, would find Tarentum fighting against them with the other party. Papirius, after hearing their message, acted as if he was swayed by their words. He responded that he would talk to his colleague and called for Publilius. Still, they used all their time to prepare for battle. After discussing briefly with his colleague about a matter that they already decided, he called for the battle signal. 

While the consuls were busy with religious rituals and other usual tasks before a fight, the Tarentine ambassadors approached them, expecting an answer. To them, Papirius said, "Tarentines, the pullularius announces that the auspices are favorable, and that our sacrifices have been accepted: under the direction of the gods, we're proceeding, as you see, to battle." He then ordered the standards to be advanced and led out the troops, scolding the Tarentines as a vain and frivolous people, unfit to manage their own affairs due to internal sedition and discord, and yet bold enough to presume to dictate peace and war to others.

On the other side, the Samnites, hadn't prepared for battle. Either they truly wanted peace or it was expedient to pretend to win the Tarentines' favor. Regardless, they were shocked to see the Romans ready for battle. They shouted that they would continue to be under the authority of the Tarentines, and would neither march out onto the field, nor carry their arms beyond the rampart. Even if deceived, they would rather endure any consequence which chance may bring, than show contempt to the Tarentines, the advisers of peace.

The consuls responded that they accepted this as an omen. Then, they prayed that the enemy would \[indeed continue talking and\] not even think to defend their rampart. Dividing their forces, the Romans immediately began attacking from all sides. Some filled up the trenches, others tore down the rampart and then leaped into the trenches. All were motivated, not only by their natural bravery, but by the resentment that had been building up since their disgrace. They made their way into the camp.

Each soldier reminded himself that this was not the narrow passages of the Caudine Forks or some other impassable mountain pass where deception had triumphed over error, but a place where Roman valor alone would overcome trenches and ramparts. They killed everyone, those who resisted and those who fled, the armed and unarmed, freemen and slaves, young and old, men and cattle. Not a single thing alive would have escaped if the consuls had not given the signal for retreat, using commands and threats to get the bloodthirsty soldiers out of the camp.

The soldiers were furious at being stopped in the sweetness of their revenge, but the consuls immediately addressed them. Their decision to stop was not that they meant to stop the soldiers in their hatred of the enemy. On the contrary, the consuls, themselves, would have led the way to exact vengeance, but they had to consider the six hundred horsemen who were held as hostages in Luceria. They didn't want the enemy, in their desperation, to harm them. The soldiers applauded this decision. They were glad that their anger had been checked. They agreed that they should endure anything, rather than put the safety of so many distinguished Roman youths at risk.