**9.16** From this point forward, it's clear that the other wars were concluded by the consuls.

Aulius, through one victorious battle, completely defeated the Ferentani. The city itself, where the army had dispersed, surrendered after Aulius had demanded hostages.

The other consul had similar success against the people of Satricum. These were Roman citizens who, after the defeat at Caudium, had defected to the Samnites and allowed a Samnite garrison into their city. However, when the Roman army neared their city walls of Satricum, they sent representatives to plead for peace. The Consul responded harshly, telling them that unless they either put to death, or delivered up, the Samnite garrison, they were not to return to him.

Such a demand caused more fear among the colonists than the threat of the Roman army. The representatives then asked the Consul several times how they, being few and weak, could use force against a strong, well-armed garrison. He told them to go ask those who told them to allow the garrison to enter in the first place. They left and returned to their fellow citizens, barely obtaining permission from Consul Aulius that they would consult the Satricum senate and bring back their response.

The Satricum senate was divided into two factions; one led by those who had caused the defection from the Roman people, and the other made up of citizens who remained loyal. However, both factions wanted to find a way to make peace with the Consul.

Unprepared for a siege, the Samnite garrison planned to leave the town the next night. The party that had introduced them into Satricum thought it would be enough to tell the Consul what time of night, which gate, and by which road the enemy would leave. The other faction, who had opposed the defection to the Samnites, even opened one of the city gates for Consul Aulius that night, secretly letting the Roman army into the town.

As a result of this double betrayal, the Samnite garrison, having encamped in the wooded places near the road, was unexpectedly overwhelmed and defeated. At the same time, a shout was raised in the city, which was now filled with the Romans. In just one hour, the Samnites were killed, the people of Satricum were taken prisoner, and everything was placed under Consul Aulius' control. After investigating who had caused the revolt, he had them flogged and beheaded, and then disarmed the people of Satricum, placing a strong garrison in the city.

Some writers say that Papirius Cursor then went to Rome to celebrate his Triumph, being credited with the retaking of Luceria and the humiliation of the Samnites by sending them under the yoke.

Without a doubt, Papirius was a deserving warrior, praised for his mental and physical strength. He was extraordinarily fast, which is how he got his surname (Cursor), surpassing every one of his age in a footrace, whether due to natural strength or intense training. He was also said to be able to consume large amounts of food and wine. Because he himself had an invincible body for labor, no soldier or horseman ever found military service more demanding under any other general, because he wasn't easily worn out. Once, when the cavalry asked to be excused from some of their duties in recognition of their good behavior, he told them, "You can't say that I haven't granted you some relief. I relieve you from rubbing down your horses' backs when you dismount."

He also maintained strict command over both his allies and his fellow Romans alike. The praetor of Praeneste, out of fear, had been slow to move his men from the rear reserves to the front line. Papirius, as he was walking in front of his tent, called him out and then ordered the lictor to prepare his axe. The Praenestine stood lifeless, terrified. Papirius then said, "Here, lictor, cut away this stump. It's troublesome to people as they walk." After scaring him with the threat of severe punishment, he reprimanded the Praenestine and let him go.

It's certain that during that era, which produced many virtuous men, there was no man who provided more effective support to Roman affairs than Papirius. People even considered him a match for Alexander the Great, should Alexander have turned his attention to Europe after conquering Asia.