**9.2** After making these predictions, which were as accurate as they were disheartening, Gaius Pontius led his troops and set up camp near Caudium, hidden as much as possible. 

From there, he sent ten soldiers dressed as shepherds with various kinds of cattle to Calatia, where he had heard that the Roman consuls were camped. He instructed them to scatter some cattle near the Roman posts and, when they encountered any Roman foragers, to all tell the same story: that the Samnite legions were in Apulia, besieging Luceria with all their forces and were close to capturing it.

This rumor had already been spread on purpose and, by now, it had reached the Romans. It was an especially believable rumor because all the captives told the same story. The Samnites knew that the Romans would rush to aid the Lucans, who were loyal allies, and also to prevent all of Apulia from defecting to the Samnites due to the fear of imminent danger. The only question was which route they should take.

There were two roads to Luceria. The first route was along the coast of the Adriatic sea, which was open and wide; it was safer, but it took longer. The other was a shorter route through the Caudine Forks. This area had two deep, wooded canyons connected by mountains on both sides, with a large field in the middle that was rich in grass and water. The passage ran through the middle of this field. However, to reach it, one needed to first pass through a narrow passage. The only way out was to backtrack or to proceed through another, even narrower and more difficult passage.

It was into this plain that the Romans descended. When trying to leave by the other side, they discovered the passage had been blocked by fallen trees and a pile of large stones. They realized they had fallen into a trap. An enemy garrison was spotted on the hill above the canyon. They turned around and tried to retreat the way they had come, but found it had also been blocked and guarded. The Romans halted their march without any command being given, stunned, with a paralyzing dread seizing everyone's mind and body. They remained motionless for a long time, looking to each other for guidance, and each thinking the other was more capable of thought and decision than himself.

After a while, they saw the consuls' tents being set up and some soldiers preparing to build fortifications. Although they knew it was futile to try to fortify their position in their current desperate situation, not wanting to add blame to misfortune, they all began to work without any command or encouragement, building and fortifying the camp, surrounding it with a rampart near the water. They themselves made fun of their work and labor as futile, while the enemy arrogantly taunted them. On their own accord, the tribunes and legates gathered at the tent of the gloomy consuls even though they weren't summoned, since there was no need for discussion or help. The soldiers crowded around the consuls' headquarters, calling on their leaders for help, which even the immortal gods might not have been able to provide.