**9.6** The consuls were the first to be sent, half-naked, under the yoke. Following them, each officer, based on his rank, was subjected to the same disgrace. Then each legion followed, one after the other. The enemy stood on both sides, taunting and mocking them. Many of them had drawn their swords; some Romans were wounded or killed if the expression on their faces, as they endured the humiliation, offended the victors. This was how they were marched under the yoke, though what was even more unbearable was that it was before the eyes of the enemy.

Once they had escaped from the narrow passage through the forest, it seemed as if they had escaped from hell and were seeing the light for the first time. However, once daylight illuminated the disgraceful procession of the army, that light was sadder to them than any form of death could have been.

While they could have reached Capua before nightfall, they were unsure about the loyalty of the allies and were restrained by shame. In need of everything, they collapsed on the ground on both sides of the road not far from Capua. When this news reached the people of Capua, it was enough to overcome the typical arrogance of the Campanians, and they felt genuine compassion for their allies. They immediately sent appropriate military cloaks and symbols of authority to the consuls and, to the soldiers, they kindly sent arms, horses, clothes, and ample provisions.

As the soldiers neared Capua, their entire assembled senate and people went out to greet them, offering every possible act of hospitality, both public and private. However, the kindness, sympathetic looks, and comforting words of the allies couldn't elicit a single word from them, nor could it persuade them to lift their eyes or look their comforting friends in the face. Their shame, coupled with their grief, made them flee from the company and conversation of their friends.

The next day, when the young nobles who had been sent from Capua to accompany them to the borders of Campania, returned, they were summoned to the senate. In response to the questions of the elder members, they said that they had found the Roman soldiers deeply depressed and disheartened. The entire group moved in silence, almost as if they were mute. The former spirit of the Romans was crushed, and their courage had been taken from them along with their arms. No one responded to greetings, nor did they reply to any questions. It was as if they were still carrying the yoke under which they had been sent; no one dared utter a word. The Samnites hadn't only achieved a glorious victory, but also a lasting one. They hadn't just defeated Rome, as the Gauls had done before, but they had conquered something far greater: the courage and ferocity of the Romans.