**4.11** Marcus Fabius Vibulanus and Publius Aebutius Cornicen were appointed as consuls.

From the beginning, they understood that they were following a year of significant achievements in both domestic and military affairs. Outside of Rome, the previous year was especially notable because of the assistance and care provided to the Ardeans in their time of crisis. As Rome had made this popular call and was reaping the rewards, the consuls worked hard to erase the memory of the unpopular judgment made against Ardea. A Senate decree was passed that, since Ardea had been reduced to so few citizens because of internal issues, a colony should be sent there to protect them against the Volscians. This was openly recorded in the records, but actually, this was just a cover story, not to alarm the plebeians and plebeian tribunes. Instead, what they had privately agreed upon was that most of these colonists should be Rutulians, whose capital was Ardea, and not Romans. They agreed that no land would be distributed except that which had been taken previously by that infamous trial. No Roman would receive a single clod of land until all the Rutulians had been provided for. Thus, the land was returned back to the Ardeans.

The triumvirs appointed to move the colony to Ardea were Agrippa Menenius, Titus Cloelius Siculus, and Marcus Aebutius Helva. These men had to perform a difficult task, and so they were unpopular. They offended the plebeians by giving the land, which the Roman people had previously decided was theirs, to the Rutulians. On the other side, they were also given no support by the patricians, as they did not cultivate any relationships with them. When the plebeian tribunes impeached the three of them in anger and set a date for them to appear before the people, they avoided any trouble by enrolling themselves as settlers and staying in the colony at Ardea, which now served as proof of their integrity and justice.